his left oriented philosophy and relentless fight against feudalism , its decadent values and institutionalised church made him darling of the downtrodden and , simultaneously a thorn in the eye of the powerful .
having ascertained the values of the force of friction for eight different weights , we proceed to inquire into the laws which may be founded on our results .
instead what we see is embedded with our own experiences , interests , expectations , and values .
highs sometimes reach values between , especially if the wind is blowing from the south or from the west ( föhn effect ) .
monteverde 's operas contain many bits of independent orchestral music , but it was in attempting to illustrate the incidents of his dramas by means of the orchestral part that he divorced the accompaniment from the voice parts and discovered the relative values of some of his instruments .
let us develop a true sense of values in religion that will place emphasis on the voluntaristic or ethical element rather than on either the intellectual , pietistic and symbolical or æsthetic .
not around the inventors of new noise , but around the inventors of new values , doth the world revolve ; inaudibly it revolveth. ” chapter xli .
grand-pré prize winner - this biannual award recognizes artist whose work reflects acadian cultural values and traditions , while demonstrating excellence and originality .
where winds of change did dispel the mists , among the educated classes in western lands , inherited orthodoxies were all too often replaced by the blight of an aggressive secularism that called into doubt both the spiritual nature of humankind and the authority of moral values themselves .
the wang center is non-partisan and non-sectarian , and upholds the values of pluralism , democracy , and equality .
you are like a young , inexperienced lad , who is required to superintend all the complicated machinery of a manufactory , which he never was trained to understand , and on penalty of losing reputation , health , and all he values most .
at the same time i also informed him that i was accountable to the lords of admiralty or vice admiralty for the values and produce of the sales made by my decrees .
unfinished , you are without the markets you have been shouting for these years ; finished , it lets in american competition and trebles your values in land . ''
he dared not invoke the aid of unshrinking honesty to apportion the values between their physical and their mental affinity .
if we fall under the power of the will-to-disbelieve , we shall indeed be well protected from fraud , but ill equipped for the creation of new values , either in our own life or in that of others , which is the prime business of man .
and it is time to pass on to pay a brief tribute to the work of a german philosopher who accepted the mechanical theory in its totality , without sacrificing what we may call the spiritual values of existence .
the second parameter is optional , and is one of the possible values described in the table below .
we only need a wrapper that handles the basic input values .
and just as clear is his supreme esteem for values that are permanent and pure .
these values all indicate a relatively healthy stream .
as the values are paper currencies , silver currencies , or conventional values , and of fluctuating rates , i have in such instances taken a yearly average , which will be found in the footnotes of the tables .
under its mission , " ndi provides practical assistance to civic and political leaders advancing democratic values , practices and institutions .
he holds that children 's formal education lasts too long , that the school teaches petit bourgeois over bourgeois values , that school damages the student the longer it lasts , and that children would be better off without formal schooling altogether .
these were originally manual , similar to slide rules which could convert cargo levels to values such as deadweight tonnage , draft , and trim .
for example , a person who votes for a socially conservative republican candidate , based solely on his or her support of gun rights , may not necessarily share the candidate 's other views on social issues , such as abortion or family values .
why had this new and sudden sense of values come over her ?
wikipedia values his contributions , he should establish consensus on the talk page before making such edits .
these were simultaneously programs for higher efficiency and for the maintenance of values rooted in religious belief , as long as these did not adversely affect the outcome of work or of market transactions .
this wonderful transformation in values has arisen through adopting a system of irrigation , chiefly by tapping underground streams and bringing them to the surface .
in summary , we contend that humanistic nursing practice necessarily involves the conceptualization of that practice and an examination of its inherent values and that humanistic nursing theory must be derived from nurses ' lived experience .
gold has always been the standard of values among all civilized nations .
i thought of him subconsciously acting out the role of his many anti-heroes by parading their values through the pages of his many would-be books .
it would be easy to select a group of stars with reference to which the solar motion would be reversed 180° from the values assigned above ' ( _astrophysical journal_ , vol .
the diagram shows the relative values of gold for the different years as a percentage on the value of 1860 taken at 100 .
america will take the side of brave men and women who advocate these values around the world , including the islamic world , because we have a greater objective than eliminating threats and containing resentment .
the program teaches children to respect rules and laws as the embodiment of social values and as tools for protecting individuals and society .
stories , songs , architecture , and advertisements are all methods of interaction that guide individuals in a culture to promote certain values and teach them how to behave .
she was sadly lacking in a discrimination of values .
thus wagner , the greatest and most inspired exponent of love among modern artists , declared that of all values love was the greatest .
in doing this , he will perceive the varying scale of values ; some of the bells reflect great value , others less .
compass-and-straightedge construction notes that angles with certain values can be trisected , but not all possible angles .
mahan stresses the importance of the individual in shaping history , and extols the traditional values of loyalty , courage , and service to the state .
that procedure first finds the factorization with the least values of a and b .
the highway has annual average daily traffic values as high as 43,000 west of gage boulevard to as low as 10,370 near the eastern terminus with interstate 70 .
wherever the higher values are reached it is certain that extravagant profits are paid to middlemen or great waste exists in the kitchen .
they often use jewish feminist values to reflect upon ethical practices in judaism and in the modern world .
this symbols have roughly approximate values of corresponding ipa symbols except that the vowel transcribed as by trager is phonetically ipa and in trager 's phonemic categorizing a low back vowel ( with rounding details irrelevant to the categorization ) .
but much that passes for criticism ignores this aspect of the case and deals merely with a question of literary values .
however , drivers with ai values over 100 " cheat " , that is , their car is faster and grips better than the normal car .
and the value of everything else would also change with this change , and so money could not determine values .
jonathan baron and mark spranca use the term " protected values " when referring to values governed by deontological rules .
but no man attains to a right estimate of the comparative worth of all that belongs to him until he values his character more than all things else , and is willing to suffer the loss of all his other possessions in order to preserve that .
the industrial engineering graduate program ranked 26th in the nation , and the engineering program as a whole finished 98th , and is one of the " best values " for arkansas students nationally .
operands can be single- or double-precision floating-point values .
it issues from an abiding faith that `` above all things truth beareth away the victory '' and hence that no fearless inquiry can harm the essential values of life .
for example , communication programs often have prespecified values for baud rate , bit size and parity that are used unless alternative values are given .
ricardo , though indicating that he is concerned only with relative values on the page cited _supra_ , still speaks of values as simultaneously falling , in ch .
his wife might have incited him to nobler work ; but lucrezia is not the woman from whom such incentives proceed ; she values her husband 's art for what it brings her .
today , also , people seek aesthetic values of peace , beauty , and serenity found in nature ’ s solitudes , in addition to forest products for economic use .
the dynamic nature of these values , and the fact that they are used multiple times across multiple articles , makes it necessary to keep all of them updated on a single page .
both voltaire and rousseau were rationalists and deists to the end of their days and both were unwearied foes of any other-than-natural sources for our spiritual knowledge and religious values .
if we include in the comparison the values of animals and animal products , orchards , vineyards , and gardens , the proportion is something nearer 30 to 1 , while the breadth of improved land is not as 10 to 1 .
that is , when the values obtained for the concentrations of the ions and of the nondissociated molecules , in solutions of various [ p108 ] strengths , are substituted in this formula , different values are obtained .
rent values of land , 293 .
at the last , having reached our final standing ground , we must look back in order that we may clearly define the lessons and ultimate values of the whole doctrine of evolution .
the brutal and self-conscious man will be humbled when he sees things and values changing to such an extent .
the bourgeois tendency has its inevitable role in society , but must not be absolutized ; rather , the bourgeoisie must be purified , contained , its values given their space but subordinated to superior values .
in the bivalve shells , the muscles which close the values of the shell are called adductor muscles .
the potence and the values of fine motherhood are proven by the fact that every great , or good , or clever man or woman has been the child of a great , or good , or clever mother .
the result was the document " basic values for guards " ( handlingsnorm för väktare ) , a list of 20 theses describing how a security guard should act , which over the years has evolved into the group 's current basic values for employees guide .
for example , if blood pressure measurements are made daily for a week on each subject in a study , there would be seven data values for each statistical unit .
when i returned to the task in late-november i was appalled at how many articles had valid sort values in but nothing in .
such uses include allocatable arrays as derived type components , in procedure dummy argument lists , and as function return values .
a study of the nuts of the 1918 contest which were awarded high values for plumpness and those which were awarded low values showed that in no case was a nut which had a shrivelled kernel awarded a high value for proportion of kernel .
this logic of experience aims to evaluate the significance of social research , psychology , fine and industrial art , and religious aspiration in the form of scientific statement , and to accomplish for social values in general what the physical sciences have done for the physical world .
or , assuming `` utilities and costs '' constant , we may let the legal and moral values vary , and see what consequences would follow .
overcoming this crisis , he says , requires a deep-time view of human nature , values and social systems .
part two -- advance course : twenty lessons on thought values , thought directions , persuasion , power , climax , etc. , etc .
diamandis explained that the album is " a body of work largely inspired by the seduction of commercialism , modern social values , family and female sexuality " .
we should come to the same conclusion , if we realized that no matter what their comparative values might be , a base at one place would not meet our necessities , and a base at the other place would .
on 3 may 2010 , pellizotti 's name was released by la gazzetta dello sport as being one of several riders under investigation by the union cycliste internationale ( uci ) for " irregular blood values " .
a status is considered pathological , if some parameters have values beyond certain limits , more or less conventionally imposed .
four special coordinate converters , each with a mechanism in part like that of a traditional computer mouse , converted the received corrections into target motion vector values .
for that night established values , life-long habits , negations , prudence , were set at naught .
cesi enables each member school to be assessed and evaluated against a set of educational and operational standards to ensure a high quality educational environment and also permit each school to set its own goals and enshrine its own values .
a thousand indications assure us that , in the world of intellect at any rate , the winds are quieting down , and that in the best minds the eternal values will soon spring up once more .
in mathematics , and more specifically in naive set theory , the domain of definition ( or simply the domain ) of a function is the set of " input " or argument values for which the function is defined .
—— values , 201 .
comparison of slave values as measured in the several other staples would show quite similar trends , though these great appreciations were accompanied by no remotely proportionate increase of the slaves ' industrial capacities .
other values of privacy are related to the growth of self-consciousness , self-respect , and personal ideals of conduct .
the 1st relates to values in particular .
very little has been done to attempt an adequate assessment of supposedly criminogenic subcultural values , and several studies conducted in the late 1970s claimed to falsify the assumptions upon which the subculture of violence theory depends .
the real line consists almost entirely of such values , required to form a geometric continuum .
however , the exact values for the above criteria range from 0 .
there are no patented truths for all times—each age must sketch its own image of the world , must form new values .
day by day , through the changing events of the past year , the conviction had grown , until it was now the dominant cause and mover of her being , and was assuming superhuman proportions in her estimated values of things transcendent .
in december 2002 , nation media group of kenya purchased controlling interests in the company and this has since helped to ingrain the company with world class values in editorial management including standardizing the group 's editorial policies .
the national mint , on the square of the republic , is also a fine granite building ; so is that devoted to the bourse , where enormous values change hands daily .
the number of stamps of different values circulating in the different countries of the civilised world that issue them ( and there is hardly one such country that does not do so ) , is rather over 2,000 .
today 's la victoria offers its residents and visitors to the satisfaction of visiting its stately parks and enjoy the wonders of their culture , thereby imparting values among younger generations .
they also found markedly lower diffusion values in white matter and increased cerebral spinal fluid compartments .
to kaunda it was the coming together of his christian ethics and the values of traditional african society .
as prices are now based on united states notes at par with gold , no disturbance of values would result from the change .
furthermore , there is the danger of an appreciable gulf between the values demonstrated in circle time and the reality witnessed around the school in terms of teachers ' attitudes towards each other or towards children .
three grays , a scale the next step is to mix three values , light , medium and dark , in three white dishes .
she could pick out the sound values .
if , however , we can keep , in spite of their seductions , our sense of proportion , our perception of relative values , we shall enjoy them in security .
yes , the quantifier are over the set of the two truth values .
game revolution noted the strong production values of most of the fmv and while a minority had " back yard " production , they nevertheless used quality actors and " fairly impressed " the reviewer , though he criticised the " mtv-like editing " .
in absolute terms , exchange values can also be measured as quantities of average labour-hours .
israel 's problem today lies in the disintegration of these values , due largely to the intoxication with military success and the belief that military superiority is a substitute for peace .
the ore dump with its known values was a sure thing , while the sluice mining was always a gamble . ''
the ideal community but furnishes the social environment in which the human spirit realizes its highest values .
sometimes simple rational approximations are exceptionally close to interesting irrational values .
some cultural groups continued to place a value on the moral purity of an abstainer , but abstinence was caught up in a wider reevaluation of moral values .
the hierarchy of goods , the architecture of values , is the subject that concerns man most .
`` to recover something which i guess she values above ten thousand combs , '' and elmer as he spoke held up the string of beads forming the rosary .
to-day we set values on everything , even on men 's bodies ; eyes , ears , legs and lives can be priced .
placement uses rc values from virtual route ( vr ) to calculate timing .
at that date land values were still 60 per cent below those of 1860 , and the numbers of live stock 40 per cent below .
many pacifists , and all non-pacifists , differ from the absolutists in that they place other values before this supreme respect for every human personality .
separate versions of this set were also released with different values for use in the northeastern provinces and taiwan .
truths have various and unequal values , but each has its peculiar place , and if it be missing or distorted , the loss is not only local but general .
`` london '' is rather a vague term , but the differences between the values of h and i at kew and greenwich -- in the extreme west and east -- are almost nil .
did you ever hear of any other car at anywhere near this price that affords such big values ?
you can encrypt values before putting them into the database ( probably using a symmetric cipher from javax .
denslow , van buren , on prices and values , 6* .
at the court a limited recognition might be given , as fashion veered , to the values prevalent in the hellenistic world .
the binding of nisoxetine is saturable in human placental net , with specific binding values being 13 .
this shows the values and the variables in a single cycle run of apescript .
limits the outcomes where the variable can only take on discrete values .
it 's only that mrs. lennart has got to realize once for all that the special public that she has catered to so long and faithfully with honest values and small profit , has really got a ten-cent taste !
the resulting model is known as logistic regression ( or multinomial logistic regression in the case that k-way rather than binary values are being predicted ) .
on the contrary , the experience of history shows often enough that spiritual revivals have been accompanied in their origin and growth by manifestations externally insignificant ; and that something which struggles against the broad stream of human life fundamentally changes the standards and values of our existence .
at the forefront of both the behavioralist and post-behavioralist revolutions in the discipline of political science during the 1950s and 1970s , easton provided the discipline 's most widely used definition of politics as the authoritative allocation of values for the society .
a given song is represented by a vector containing values for approximately 450 " genes " ( analogous to trait-determining genes for organisms in the field of genetics , although it has been argued that this methodology bears greater resemblance to phylogeny genes .
he takes no account here of the complication that the third step is in large degree a comparison , not of marginal utilities proper , but rather , of `` subjective values in exchange . ''
latitude and longitude values can be based on different geodetic systems or datums , the most common being wgs 84 , a global datum used by all gps equipment .
and , after such a process , both values may be different from what they were .
this is the rare 14-bit continuous controller feature of the midi specification , and nrpns simply take advantage of that existing option in the same way to offer 16,384 possible values instead of only 128 .
the school has a strong character development program based on stephen covey 's the seven habits of highly effective people , and greek language , dance and christian orthodox values are important at the school .
he felt that religion is an illusion based on human values that are created by the mind to overcome inner psychological conflict .
our contention is that the world of values , which forms the content of idealistic thought and aspiration , is the real world ; and in this world we find our own immortality .
while there was praise for its ambitious scope , production values and action , the film was overall poorly received , criticized for being tedious and slow , as well as the ethnicity of its lead actors ( namely banderas and strong ) .
the rising upper-middle class elites , in the business , financial and professional worlds , tended to accept the values of the old traditional elites .
he said , `` how many of this congregation this morning are among those who have given up in the race of life , who have despaired of values and standards to cling to , who have forsaken the leadership of all who would lead you ?
whether it be the folds of a sash , the modeling of an arm in a sleeve , the substance and set of a ruff , or the construction of a face , each is attained by observing the relation of the values .
it should be clear from our explicitly stated community values that a low rating on elementary-school-safe is not a warning .
by engaging in the export business they hoped to become an influence in keeping export values -- the price at port william , in other words -- at a truer level .
some of their paintings are among those the world knows best and values most highly , and they have gained in prestige in later years as the knowledge and appreciation of teutonic art has spread .
common measure of values ( standard of value ) .
but we have seen how , in the renaissance and the romantic movement , individualism supplanted these values .
when her own adaptation is unusually rapid and easy , she advances alone to rapid acquaintance with the rules and customs , transport and cutting equipment , emergency procedures , commercial values , and some of the planet-bound specialists .
the vast subject of the abstract values of right and wrong , the ultimate decrees of conscience , whether in matters of great or minute importance , might seem inexhaustible in itself .
the three additional color interpretations use the information in two color clocks ( four bits ) to generate a pixel in one of 16 color values .
and the total values in carbon from 64 to 80 per cent .
corollary results are derived for the maximum singular values of rectangular matrices .
kritoboulos values his beauty because it encourages men toward all forms of virtue , not just justice .
at karasjok simpson ( 10 ) found fairly similar mean values of a for two groups of observations , one confined to cases when the potential gradient exceeded +400 volts , the other confined to cases of negative gradient .
it is very ironic that gay activism , stimulated by the many consequences of the aids epidemic , attempts to reverse time , fighting for equal access to exactly those means in which the values and prejudices that condemn homosexuality are embedded .
nevertheless , the illustration is most instructive as showing how extremely misleading it may be to compare values only , without taking account of quantities .
food values in terms of standard units of weight .
to help inform decision-makers , many ecosystem services are being assigned economic values , often based on the cost of replacement with anthropogenic alternatives .
at the congress in jambi in 1999 , hmi returned to recognizing islam as the main source of values .
eugenio pino and family global entrepreneurship center housed in the college of business administration that has led to research and a seminar on asian cultural values in business .
thus his temper was less bitter than before , his poise was less a pose , the result of a new adjustment of values .
this is more expensive than power line electricity , but lacks the degree of intrusion on amish values and households that would result if fixed-line external power were used .
i worked in machine language , but if you gave me binary code and binary data for a cpu i know , i could easily distinguish which was data and which was code based on the op codes , registers , values , etc .
the instrument may be used to monitor ozone values for industrial applications or to determine the amount of ambient ozone at ground level and determine whether these values violate national ambient air quality standards ( naaqs ) .
raids and prosecution , night visits from men who did not live in the district , called attention to the changed character of the neighborhood , and property values sank lower .
amazingly the asymptotic behavior near the accumulation point appeared universal in the sense that the same numerical values would appear .
slots can have multiple values .
individuals who exemplified these core company values received award cubes , such as the one show below , in acknowledgement of their efforts .
although his grandparents were observant jews , his parents embraced enlightenment values , including their assimilation into modern german society .
fruits , table of food values of , 177 , 179 .
he had a sort of respect for the boy , as representing much money and many inchoate values .
this clash of values has been fraught with controversy .
you could see that antigone had parted with her sense of values and distinctions , that she had lost her bearings ; she was a creature that drifted blindly on a boundless sea of compassion .
empty values to the " main " .
the following trial balance should be compared with the preceding and the difference in their values , in respect to the information given , carefully noted .
coll achieved true tonal gradations in his illustrations by using pen strokes to build up a complete range of values .
in the first place , compensation is impossible : all values being monopolized , where would society get the means to indemnify the monopolists ?
the aim of the process has been described in general terms to create familiarity among the members and to inculcate the values of the society .
these aspects of food are all commanded in order to protect kinship , purity , ritual , ethical values , and social stratification , each of which play a huge part in hindu society .
in general you may find two solutions for y for some values of x , and no solutions for other values of x .
recombination losses are accounted for by the quantum efficiency , voc ratio , and fill factor values .
his nature is peculiar in the fact that the organs of the brain which deal with property values , and the ability to make a living by ordinary transactions , are almost entirely idiotic .
many of the what _ check options determine normality values ; that is , the number of standard deviations that any given observation deviates from its mean .
in addition , values in the form of volatilised metallic products are also conveyed by the gases , particularly when lead , zinc , arsenic , etc. , are present in the furnace charge , and these are carried forward in the form of _fume_ .
we are , on this basis , aiming to achieve a condition in which the desires , wants , and needs are well met , in which each individual contributes his share of supplies to the common stock of economic values , and receives in turn his equitable amount .
the approach to a modern scheme of institutions and modern conceptions of life and of human values has been slow , and hitherto incomplete , as compared with those communities that have , for good or ill , gone farthest along the ways of modernity .
parkways and land values , by john nolen & henry vincent hubbard .
it compares cells ( formulae , constants and calculated values ) , comments , defined ranges ( names ) and visual basic for applications ( vba ) macros .
the committee also values those who promote the general advancement of science and individuals who have influenced science education , although these traits are less important than groundbreaking or thought-provoking research .
there seem to have been , in holbein 's day , but two physical values : the grave , alert , `` sunnily-ascetic '' men , who were dissatisfied with the time ; and the able bold time-servers , who kept their flesh upon them , and their peace .
from here , ahmed moves through an analysis of how happiness is used to justify unequal divisions in labor and education as an orientation device to a particular type of social values to an argument about how happiness is used as a sort of boundary on gender roles .
for some values of n the ( n , 3 ) lattice may have multiple distinct realizations ( as distinguished by the pattern of bonding ) .
he seemed to be playing the part for laughs , and although there were some comic values to be extracted from the role , it was really far more a straight dramatic character .
it is also necessarily an effect of fine shades , delicate values , vanishing distinctions , of evasiveness , inconsequence , suggestion .
i am confused about why the revisions would be disallowed , since the length values are still true .
we will consider different values of .
therefore a study of the conditions upon which preponderance in its waters has rested , and now rests , and of the relative military values of different points upon its coasts , will be more instructive than the same amount of effort expended in another field .
animals are held to have intrinsic worth , not just the values they derive from their usefulness to man .
yet fictitious values fixed by convention and utility are set down as truth .
to get the actual lethal fluence , you can use the equations and values from the papers .
for example , in table 1 we could square each of the ordinal utility values so that from the top down they read .
a name of several english gold coins struck in different reigns and having having different values ; a rose noble .
survival values versus production values 65 lesson vii -- prenatal influences influencing the child before birth .
ransom. -- it is impossible to give values for long lists of stamps .
poetry , on the other hand , is `` the spontaneous overflow of powerful feelings '' ; its purpose is to express life for the sake of the values which expression itself may create , and to communicate them to others .
`` i am glad to hear that m. jusserand likes my books ; he is just the kind of frenchman whose opinion one really values .
the values of the minor pair are almost equal ; of the major the third exceeds the first .
[ 3330 ] he values men according to the quality and quantity of their work , according to their net returns , and he estimates them directly , personally , with superior perspicacity and universal competency .
if i should speak , sir , how he values you , i should too much oppress your modesty .
here and are the -th columns of the corresponding svd matrices , are the ordered singular values , and each is separable .
what then shall be said of those scholars of our time , blind to all great issues , and without any appreciation of relative values , who can only bark out their stale formulas about `` virtue '' and `` civilization , '' condemning the use of military weapons ?
in september , 1845 , mr. adams communicated to me values which he had obtained for the heliocentric longitude , excentricity of orbit , longitude of perihelion , and mass , of an assumed exterior planet , -- deduced entirely from unaccounted-for perturbations of uranus .
whatever is done for s1 it assumes something about values prior to the available data and is necessarily in error .
dutch tiles , japanese prints and blue towels , abruzzi towels , american blue quilts , etc. , are examples of harmony built up with several values of one hue .
there is not a man here who values any more than i do , or ever have done , the opinion of tom , or the opinion of dick , or the opinion of harry .
we then consider the n-dimensional vectors x ( formed by the successive values of x over the samples ) , y ( formed by the values of y ) and z ( formed by the values of z ) .
1,346 ) pass through zero and through their maximum values together .
for most systems of practical interest , however , it may be prohibitively expensive to compute the second derivative matrix , and it is estimated from successive values of the gradient , as is typical in a quasi-newton optimization .
in the place of reliability , irt offers the test information function which shows the degree of precision at different values of theta , θ .
two or more elementary species may have had the same origin -- a common ancestor or ancestors -- but the organisms in one species exhibit characters which , although similar in nature to those of the other species , yet fluctuate about different mean values .
in over the domain ri , a hash function h ( i ) will return a unique values j0 , j1 , .
one of the great values of ballantyne 's books is the insight he gives into life in britain in the nineteenth century , not just the day-to-day lives of the actors , but the motives that propel them , and the upbringing that these actors had .
there's always a boom in land values here and there ; but hundreds of millions of acres , urban and suburban , have not increased a penny in selling price during the past decade .
m , while the ic50 values are 7 .
all values include events that took place outside the high risk area .
but it can also be read as a satire on the sentimental novel and its values , as the vicar 's values are apparently not compatible with the real " sinful " world .
to the east , north atlantic oscillation values ranged from neutral to negative during the general time frame of the december 1969 nor 'easter , trending more consistently negative in the days surrounding its genesis .
the exact values for k_ { bas.s.p . }
organizational values and role stress as determinants of customer-oriented selling performance .
and i 'd say that 's because we 're not establishing good collaborations to negotiate between classroom values and wikipedian values on course pages that should set the stage for reproducible classroom assignments ( professor retention ) .
according to the mexican newspaper el financiero , the purpose of the initiative is to " reaffirm western values , " " work in favor of recognizing the right of israel to exist , " and counteract " anti-semitic criticism " of israel .
the cultural system is the cognitive and symbolic matrix for the central values system " ( talcott parsons ) .
the main idea of a per unit system is to absorb large difference in absolute values into base relationships .
the moon voyagers had a great store of gems , and , as they did not wish to bring down values by disposing of them , they only sold a few , which , because of their great size and brilliancy , brought a large price .
the nation 's food is becoming more and more wholesome as a result of different discoveries , new sources of supply , and the intelligent weighing of values .
the lengths on the geometric lines vary as the square root of the labeled values .
adding up all the base stat values for a certain species generates the base stat total , which players use to determine approximately how strong that pokémon is .
calvin brainerd cady 's ideas about teaching broader values through music education .
your questions as to values have been answered several times in this column .
the world seems to be counselling us that if we wish to be well and cheaply fed we must go where there are experts to cook , where buying is done in quantity , and where the manager knows about nutritive values .
in the consideration of motive it fails ; for two motives , each of a given value , have not , necessarily , a value when united , equal to the sum of their values apart .
nowadays , we are highly influenced by images in many ways and these certain images can tell us new social and cultures values , or something new about how we see the world .
information space is the set of concepts and relations among them held by an information system ; it describes the range of possible values or meanings an entity can have under the given rules and circumstances .
_continuous groups._ the determination of a particular operation of a given continuous group depends on assigning special values to each one of a set of parameters which are capable of continuous variation .
someone has remarked , in this connection , that in crossing to another hemisphere , the northern and southern points may be said to change values [ 493 ] , but this does not affect the question of orientating from a given place on a fixed meridian .
when we say that a man possesses a million , we mean that he has a _fortune_ which is worth so many units of measure of values , and these units all belong to one person .
bodelsen prefers the social-realistic style of writing , often thrillers about middle-class people that faces the consequences of materialism , which often clashes with their human values .
different values of tricks and honours according to the suit made trumps .
we wondered at his dreaming and his wanderings far astray , but we were counting values by the gold and silver way , and sometimes as i saw him gazing idly at the sky , i fancied he had pleasures of a sort i could n't buy .
after defining the above three relationships , rvt then applies the first law of geography , in order to predict the unknown values of points .
the tale of the measures of rice illustrates the importance of a true estimate of values .
he gets to a point where nothing has a value ... even to a point where his own personal values are no more than shadows .
the latter values of c correspond to normal values of the modulus of elasticity of 11,700 and 13,350 tons for iron and for steel , it being assumed that any slight rivet yield is off-set by any small section excess -- say , 5 per cent .
karl marx believed that market profits entail " cheating , deceit , inside knowledge , skill and a thousand favourable market opportunities " and that market prices do not reflect the true values of the underlying commodities and assets .
to calculate averages of suffixed grades , they are assigned fractional values , where 1 is 1 .
for the advertising campaign , 200 women were selected for their conservative values and lack of familiarity with video games .
in the final compilation of results , two sets of schedules were rendered : ( _a_ ) those which gave the land values with added increment , ( _b_ ) those which omitted the increment .
following this idea for a decreasing sequence of h values ending in 1 is guaranteed to leave a sorted list in the end .
it measures motives , and analyses the action of buyers and sellers with a view to finding out what men in business will normally do , and how values of land , labour , capital and commodities are determined .
edward dedicated the chapel at windsor castle to the soldier saint who represented the knightly values of chivalry which he so much admired , and the garter ceremony takes place there every year .
it also contains the font 's design size ; all following fix _ word values are interpreted as multiplication factors for this .
mahatma reflects on gandhian values .
the writer holds to the view that it is properly to be placed with the physical values , and that it should not be considered as an intangible element of value .
hamlet , the hero so refined intellectually , so delicate in taste , so conscious of moral values , comes to the action , not from the roman forum or from the battlefields of gaul or pharsalia , but from the university of wittenberg .
gauges are non-negative integers that can increase or decrease between specified minimum and maximum values .
she was not however brought up as jewish , and never practised judaism , though it has been suggested that she " retained the cultural values of liberal judaism " .
it displayed a sense of values , of placing , and even , in a young and frantic way , of colour .
do i first round to the correct sig figs for each of the values ( 12 .
if either variation or deviation is westward , then the values are entered into the equation as positive .
st values up to 127 ( 0x7f ) specify the minimum number of milliseconds to delay between frames , while values in the range 241 ( 0xf1 ) to 249 ( 0xf9 ) specify delays increasing from 100 to 900 microseconds .
larger values of both parameters result in better agreement with the law .
restricted underspecification theory holds that features should only be underspecified if their values are predictable .
by some strange instinct the russian public has chosen from among the crowd of writers four or five bell-men whom it values as leaders , refusing to listen to any qualifications or deductions .
palliative care strives to support children and families by assisting them in fulfilling their physical , psychological , social and spiritual goals while remaining sensitive to personal , cultural and religious values , beliefs and practices .
however , i then ran into , for example , these values on this page ; the value given for ' direct sunlight ' is indeed 100,000 lux , but it then describes ' full daylight ' as 10,000 lux , and an overcast day as 1000 lux .
when made into ink they possess about equal color values .
a worldview like secular humanism is personism when the empathy and values are extended to the extent that the creature is a person ( apes get very similar rights , insects get vastly fewer rights , etc .
it has rather modest production values but some great lines .
he values logic above almost all other qualities , and hates to feel out of control of either his emotions or whatever situation he is in .
while emphasis is placed on the development of intellectual and mental skills , attention is also given to other aspects of personal formation , such as character , attitudes , values and social interaction .
the sensory data of experience , as distinct from the psychologists ' constructs , always come _in a context_ ; they always appear as variations in a continuum of values .
where no guiding ideals are left to point the way , the scale of values disappears and with it the meaning of our deeds and sufferings , and at the end can lie only negation and despair .
the results given by the polariscope possess an accuracy rarely , if ever , attained by any other apparatus employed in the determination of practical commercial values .
_manage your buying so that your guests may enjoy your company as well as your feasts_ food values the body needs food to keep it warm , to furnish energy for the activities of daily life ; to build and repair tissue and to regulate the body process .
this housing stock in particular is being renovated , thus raising property values and attracting wealthier home owners to the area .
it is , perhaps , not easy to realize that giddings is doing the same general sort of thing that the pure economic theorist is doing , with his picture of a static equilibrium of economic values .
however , it is also possible to determine c from other physical laws where it appears , for example , by determining the values of the electromagnetic constants ε0 and μ0 and using their relation to c .
in the former case , by giving different values to c , we obtain concentric circles with the imaginary centre u0v0 .
let m and _m_ be the greatest and least values of the function [ phi ] ( [ theta ] ) in this interval .
more generally , some people object to the entire concept of marketing to children , fearing that they are easier to influence and that this marketing is unethical , or that it interferes with the values they may wish to teach their child .
as to the mean values of _m_ and μ we can not draw distinct conclusions from this material , because the parallax stars are selected in a certain way which essentially influences these mean values , as will be more fully discussed below .
for as he thinks profoundly , so he discriminates his thoughts justly , and assigns them values .
the bell has newly and unexpectedly connected the community surrounding the building on avenue of the americas at 10th street , helping to put the concept of village back in greenwich village ; it serves as a powerful , an hourly , reminder of the values of architectural preservation .
the following are the values of the vapour pressure of ice between 0° and -50° .
the change in instrumentation , enclosure and location can lead to a jump in , for example , the measured temperature or precipitation values , which can lead to erroneous estimates of climate trends .
personal taste is too easily swayed by the prevailing morals , values and tastes of the critic 's society at that point in history .
will man value the jungle as he values the precipice , for the sake of his manhood ?
stacks were increased to 23 pending operations , 8 pending values .
on another occasion he spoke of it as follows ( the english is mr. arthur symons 's ) : `` the author values it as perhaps the most _natural_ of his works .
several physicists have effected very interesting calorimetric measurements , either , like m. perot , in order to verify clapeyron's formula regarding the heat of vaporization , or to ascertain the values of specific heats and their variations when the temperature or the pressure happens to change .
this building is considered to have strong cultural , illustrative and aesthetic values as it represents a lost building type for southampton where such stores were once commonplace .
marx himself never denied that subjective valuations existed , but argued rather that they co-existed with objective values which were ultimately not determined by preferences but by real production costs .
other less frequent causes might be the player specifies slightly different segment ranges on a subsequent play , or requests other parameters with different values .
darwin , by putting man on a brute basis and ignoring spiritual values , attacks the very foundations of christianity .
] < /ety > < def > the legalized use of one metal only , as gold , or silver , in the standard currency of a country , or as a standard of money values .
a mere soldier little values the character of eloquence : a gownman of courage : a bishop of humour : or a merchant of learning .
all my excuse was that at a certain time of her life she took a sudden turn for reading and setting queer new values on things .
tom , watching lance , got up and faced him cold-eyed , unafraid , weighing not chances , but values rather .
presuming the quantities and values to be as undernoted , there will result of dollars .
despite its neutral name , movieguide describes itself as a ministry " dedicated to redeeming the values of the mass media according to biblical principles , by influencing entertainment industry executives and helping families make wise media choices " .
it is evident that he values his art .
in values , yet the money ratio remained remarkably constant , the highest being 15.52 of silver to 1 of gold and the lowest 14.14 .
as with any network where time on the bus is shared , mtu values should be configured to ensure reliable communication .
because of the emphasis on family values under vichy , the government was especially worried about infidelity among the wives of prisoners in germany .
if now we take thomas g. shearman 's estimate , that land values form sixty per cent .
they get an entirely false impression of the relative values of things .
in the course of the summer solid values began to be hoarded and interest rates consequently to rise .
there is , therefore , no treatment of international trade and values separate from the laws of value already laid down concerning non-competing groups , since there is also no free competition between all the industrial groups within a country .
exchange the values of bx , y and by , x for all x in the cluster .
smaller dx values would reduce this error and produce more accurate surface profiles .
enumerated types ( ) are named values representing integer values .
while labor which creates exchange values is _abstract_ , _universal_ and _homogeneous_ , labor which produces use-values is concrete and special and is made up of an endless variety of kinds of labor according to the way in which and the material to which it is applied .
parents need to see the values in family worship .
lfsrs which labeled as lfsra , lfsrb and lfsrk , and an s-box containing a known permutation p of the integer values 0 to 255 .
there is a marked difference in social values placed on the respect for elders in eastern and western societies .
it did n't help that we were ploughing straight uphill , moving for the zone where the seedy tenderloin gives way to the nosebleed real-estate values of nob hill .
in organic chemistry and biochemistry it is customary to use pka values for acid dissociation equilibria .
ai said that the prize was a message from the international community to the chinese government to respect universal human values , notwithstanding china 's economic performance .
protect the values and ideas that wikipedia stands for , and protect the internet .
it seems to have been fairly demonstrated that we have as yet no proper standard of values to guide us in the selection of children 's books .
most of the night she had lain staring at the ceiling , her brain busy with calculations , computations , most of all with personal values .
`` how do you know that he values it highly ? ''
i have urged him as he values our friendship not to neglect his cough , and he has assured me in return that the doctor has prepared for him a draught which possesses the supreme quality of being absolutely unable to effect the purpose for which it was devised .
the encyclopedia databases are much about how problems , strategies , values , development concepts , and organizations are linked together .
sukhbir believed letters to be a great source of information about a person 's beliefs and values over time .
such analysts believe that successive market bottoms take values that are in some kind of mathematical relationship ( almost always a straightforward arithmetic progression ) .
johnson developed a competition for students to promote the skills and values needed for success in the marketing industry .
a favorite of the mexican church hierarchy , iturbide was thought of as the personification of conservative criollo values , devoutly religious , and committed to the defense of property rights and social privileges ; he was also disgruntled at his lack of promotion and wealth .
no modern young girl is likely to obey blindly unless she values the opinions of one in whose judgment and affection she has learned to believe .
his one aim is to revise our moral values and to establish new values in their place .
ammonium levels in particular suffer from wide variations and sometimes high values .
the application of secondary chemical shifts to characterize protein flexibility is based on an assumption that the proximity of chemical shifts to random coil values is a manifestation of increased protein mobility , while significant differences from random coil values are an indication of a relatively rigid structure .
note—the values in cattle , as with everything else , ran low in the old days .
the european exchange rate mechanism froze the values of the legacy currencies in the eurozone and established the value of the euro currency .
the concern was for art as a trade -- the trade which creates beauty ; the vital questions were treatment , colour , values , tone , mediums .
as a reaction to the implicit system of values of literacy , related to limited choices , illiterate design expression does not impose upon the user in design , but involves the user in choices to be made .
salari and used his influence to lower the appraised property values for salari 's clients , to help the clients save millions of dollars in property taxes .
different groups of people may hold or prioritize different kinds of values influencing social behavior .
for larger values of n the instanton calculation suffers from infrared divergences , however the correction may nonetheless be determined precisely from the gaugino condensation .
newton interpolation formula , which finds the coefficients of a polynomial from the sequence of its values at consecutive integers by using successive differences .
invariably they challenge existing moral and intellectual values , the revaluation of which is , for the normal mind , an exceedingly difficult and painful task .
the truth is that we invert the divine standard of values , and put last what god puts first .
some argue that to allow in-game items to have monetary values makes these games , essentially , gambling venues .
everyone will acknowledge , that a thorwaldsen and an ordinary stone-cutter , with the same block of marble , the same implements , the same food , would necessarily , after the same time , turn out exceedingly different values .
by it one may recognize the values of the principles and construction methods involved .
departmental policy is protection of the natural values of the canyon from development and overuse , and restoration of the area to as near a natural condition as possible .
the character of the slag is not very different to that produced in the silica-lined converter , though it is usually lower in silica contents , and owing to the methods of frequent pouring , it is lower in copper values .
pure values of movement abstracted , unconnected with any representation whatever .
folkestone , you know , is a sea front , and it values people by sheer vulgar prosperity .
the man who is morally honest himself selects his values , his ideals , his ends , by the light which reason gives him .
she had long since erased hester 's name from her good books , for miss laird knew only angles and equations , fixed values and ratios , and had no conception of nor admiration for a mind which was not as her own .
in april 1990 , one mémo commissioner criticized pallascio 's board for passing a resolution mandating that school principals be required to uphold " christian values .
the a 10 k q j of each suit have certain counting values , which will be described further on .
october 1981 ) leader of chinese terrorist organization dedicated to a return to the values of pre-modern feudal china , who paradoxically used advanced technology .
is a symbol of faith representing values such as valour , honour and spirituality among others .
officially described as a revolutionary attempt to return to the values of communalism and solidarity inherent in the traditional society , salongo was intended to mobilize the population into the performance of collective work " with enthusiasm and without constraint " .
the total force is least in equatorial regions , where values slightly under 0.4 c.g.s .
sculpture expressed the national socialist obsession with the ideal body and espoused nationalistic , state approved values like loyalty , work , and family .
together with david held , he has been a key figure in the development of cosmopolitanism and of cosmopolitan democracy in particular , namely the attempt to apply some of the norms and values of democracy to global politics .
the comparative values of the states have altered : some have become more decisively the superiors of others than they were two hundred years ago , but they are those whose growth was foreseen .
my good lord , not your demand ; it values not your asking : our mistris sorrowes we were pittying cham .
one of our greatest assets is the friendship of great britain , and our friendship is a still bigger asset for her , and she knows it and values it .
count posadovsky , a former minister , has written a pamphlet in which he urges that the state should buy up the land in and about the cities , and also that it should fix a definite limit beyond which land values must not rise .
by using more granular tastes and values , that is , rather than the broad commonalities implied by membership to a school , workplace , or the like , this model is able to make high-quality , individually tailored connections .
to determine what values of λ and κ give uni-modal curves and what tri-modal it is convenient to consider the plane of λ and κ .
in his arabic tales collections , he rewrote stories that revolve around traditional arabic folk tales and legends , linking ancient myth to the modern values and standards of the arab people .
nietzsche always liked high-sounding words ; he does not recoil here from using the word `` untruth , '' and essays for the first time a `` reversal of values . ''
not only that , no matter how we try to land that will be the set of values for our speed .
the addition was planned as a self-contained middle to upper class residential district in which commercial activity was to be prohibited , so as to maintain property values .
a clear difference exists between these two ; an order of magnitude separates the values of k and k in the two experiments .
the following values are based upon the hammett acidity function .
_fraud_ includes _deceit_ , but _deceit_ may not reach the gravity of _fraud_ ; a _cheat_ is of the nature of _fraud_ , but of a petty sort ; a _swindle_ is more serious than a _cheat_ , involving larger values and more flagrant _dishonesty_ .
he turns all values into intellectual coin .
an example of an unbounded , hence discontinuous , linear transformation is differentiation on the space of smooth functions equipped with the supremum norm ( a function with small values can have a derivative with large values , while the derivative of 0 is 0 ) .
the name of certain gold coins of various values formerly coined in some countries of europe .
the relative values of pseudocounts represent the relative prior expected probabilities of their possibilities .
an overview of the type of behavior of the map at different parameter values may be obtained from its orbit diagram .
accordingly he finds a place in his legislation for a corrected scale of weights and measures , restored no doubt to their original values .
the spirit of that meeting was not that of sharp bargaining in commercial values , but of an earnest desire on the part of christian brethren , representing affiliated missionary societies to consummate an arrangement that would facilitate the upbuilding of the redeemer ’ s kingdom .
the english scale of values in these things is all wrong .
then sources for the process , testing for purity , vod and expansion values , videos and pictures , etc .
the impersonal values , values for exchange , seem to be in any given society or social group in inverse relation to the personal values .
actually not , a person that not yet lose the human values and nature , so meeting anti-values excite his disgust and rise a determination to repulsion , that 's the question .
i also changed it to cover values up to 10,000,000 , and took off some values from the start which skewed the axes .
but now had come an irreparable shifting of psychological values .
a manager-to-agent request to discover available variables and their values .
tuan writes that an appreciation of nature springs from wealth , privilege , and the antithetical values of cities .
if , now , after restoring the barrier the values arising by continuation from [ sigma ] be similarly plotted on the s-plane , we shall again obtain a region which , while not overlapping itself , may quite possibly overlap the former region .
paine urged the taxation of land values -- the payment to the community of a ground-rent -- and argued for death duties as `` the least troublesome method '' of raising revenue .
) < /fld > , < cd > a function whose values recur at fixed intervals as the variable uniformly increases .
it comes from the phrase " singular values of the j-invariant " used for values of the j-invariant for which a complex elliptic curve has complex multiplication .
in particular , red rot occurs at ph values of 4 .
during the same period , land values have increased and the city has gentrified .
many of their games are endowed with specific social and religious values .
the distribution of phi values over the protein agrees well with the simulated unfolding transition state in all but one helix , later identified as folding semi-independently and forming native-like contacts with the remainder of the protein only after the complete transition state has been reached .
“ values are being created there and it very often happens that some collector pays five hundred dollars for something that he refused to pay fifty for to the dealer .
i hope i need not make any apology for adding the scriptures ; this will be acceptable to everyone who values them .
conservative party values that were tailored to suit him ( or her ) .
qatar 's government is keen to protect the status quo and doesn 't want to compromise its cultural values or standard of living by allowing foreigners to become a permanent part of society .
`` i would hate to be amos if he gives carson an assay of values from that jug handle .
for instance , one can combine some measure based on the confusion matrix with the mean squared error evaluated between the raw model outputs and the actual values .
that does not mean that the pentagon values nor pays for their astrological work .
played as above , using ace-to-five low hand values , with a single joker in the deck .
but see also " ampersands in uri attribute values " .
in his paper , smith describes the technique of induced values , the method used in controlled laboratory experiments in economics , political science , and psychology .
it is also true that `` thus far performance has lagged behind promise , '' but the reasons for this are the same , and in the low values we find a ready explanation of the apparent lack of progress .
tolerance values are commonly used to assess water pollution .
the partition function is commonly used as a generating function for expectation values of various functions of the random variables .
finally , he hit upon `` an attempt at a transvaluation of all values , '' and went back to four volumes , though with a number of changes in their arrangement .
the ministry of the school is to provide a quality education where catholic traditions and values are reinforced and incorporated into all areas of instruction , in an atmosphere of faith , love , and discipline .
does the teacher seek to bring out the æsthetic values of history ?
they particularly praised the b-movie production values , " typically grainy but stylish " fmv graphics , and the effective controls even when using a standard gamepad instead of a light gun .
many have also claimed that the new deal is a violation of the norms and values stephen harper claims to abide .
if u is a function of two variables , x and y , we may similarly represent it by the ordinate of a surface , the position of the ordinate being determined by the values of x and of y jointly .
and did ten times as much damage getting it , and there was no scale of values by which to compute the death and suffering .
[ 224 ] instead of moral values let us use naturalistic values , physiological values ; let us say frankly with spinoza that virtue and power are one and the same .
three other values are needed to describe its location .
the item of $ 4,012,095 for brooklyn bridge changes and re-location of tracks is the same in each of the six plans , and includes the assessed values of the entire half blocks east of adams street .
he was trying to visualize a gravity pull whose intensity was not a single-valued pressure but a uniform continuum of pressure values from a minimum to a maximum .
_matching and imitation_ of values and hues ( using stuffs , crayons , and paints ) .
is it not possible that the recent depression in the business world has been due , in considerable measure , to the shrinkage in the values ascribed to franchise and other intangible value in public service corporation property ?
they refused to be beholden to proper grammar and style , searching for black aesthetics and black literary values .
it is due entirely to the fact that its possessor has a mind peculiarly capable of estimating and sizing up the relative values of known causes and deducting from them the natural , in fact , the inevitable results .
pid and conjectured that there are no further values .
blue-red hackenbush boards can construct dyadic rational numbers , while the values of infinite blue-red hackenbush boards account for real numbers , ordinals , and many more general values that are neither .
the three respective numerical values obtained from these experimental combinations were 4×6+1=25 , 4×7=28 , and finally 2×13 or 4×6+2=26 .
he stole away immediately , in his dreadful condition , on foot ; and when his story was authenticated , had heard nothing of his horse , gig , and bibles , which he values at three hundred dollars .
and i remember how , with the insolence of youth , i thought how dreadful it was that the old man should have lost all sympathy and judgment ; because poetry then seemed to me a really important matter , full of tones and values .
the difference in values , in the picture on this page , suggests to us the difference in color seen in the plant .
non-physical values and methods for their determination .
what an expenditure of toil and care , of heart power and brain power , what planning , what working , what feeding , what enriching , what sowing and sinking of values before one can tell whether the harvest is worth the output .
while individuals seeking profit in sale or rent of their farms may suffer in any such shrinkage of local values , it must not be forgotten that the total of rural welfare is not necessarily diminished .
) , an equation which is true for all values of the algebraic symbols which enter into it .
the msi 's political program was always vague , but its themes stressed traditional social values , law and order , and hostility towards social minorities and civil liberties .
there is no reason why they should not be pleasant additions to a community or to a landscape , and a good many are -- well planned in terms of both practical details and esthetic values , unobtrusive , and pretty .
petersburg , florida to reaffirm secular humanist values for muslim societies .
what is absent then works in the present , and values are imputed where they can not be felt .
when i say that £4 and a quarter of wheat are of the same value , i can measure other values by the quarter of wheat as well as by the £4 .
the hansen solubility parameter values are based on dispersion bonds ( δd ) , polar bonds ( δp ) and hydrogen bonds ( δh ) .
it also provides for quickly recognizable characteristic " shape " of the distribution of the values in the table which can assist the reader in grasping the rules more quickly .
they were employed sometimes as ink , and certain color values given to them , of which the more important were blue , red , yellow , green , white , black , purple , gold and silver .
aluminum electrolytic capacitors with non-solid electrolyte are the most inexpensive type and also those with widest range of sizes , capacitance and voltage values .
`` to let that sell for less than twenty thousand might cost us ten times that amount in lowering the prevailing standard of values .
all this signifies an entire reversal of the order of life ; for , since the world which formerly had seemed secondary now becomes predominant , indeed exclusive , all standards and values are changed , and the old possession appears also as a new gain .
appendix work for the telescope to make at first hand the acquaintance of the celestial bodies is , in and of itself , worth the while , as leading the mind to a new sense of ultimate values .
in crystallography , due to the crystallographic restriction theorem , n is restricted to the values of 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , or 6 .
next , since the different forms of religion must be compared if their relative values are to be ascertained , the method of the applied science of religion must be the method of comparison .
this has been blamed on its relatively poor production values and it having a reportedly complicated , rather than simply positive or negative , view of the war .
he has grown up in a different emotional zone , accustomed to a different standard of values than the middle european .
the ideals and equipment of these special institutions are factors of prime importance in determining their real values .
older siblings may therefore also be more likely to uphold their parents ' traditional values because of the power it affords them within the family .
for each of these possible values then , get the remainder n-3c and apply the above argument to count how many ways to carve it up .
records of the values of each account in the balance sheet are maintained using a system of accounting known as double-entry bookkeeping .
affective adaptation to the environment in accord with knowledge , potential , and values .
the concept of function can be extended to an object that takes a combination of two ( or more ) argument values to a single result .
others mentioned the inadequacy of a medium bound to fail because it was so opaque that it covered thoughts instead of revealing them , validated false values instead of exposing them for what they were .
it identifies core values and ethics to provide a guide for ethical and accountable practice .
e._ , interest and profit ) on reproduction cost of the property , less accrued depreciation , plus going value , plus a nominal allowance for the franchise and other intangible values of the corporation ?
this has a significant effect on the values for the stellar and the planetary parameters .
glacial lakes situated up from the elevations of in the mercan valley , springs in the ovacık plain , canyons and waterfalls along the valleys enrich the natural values of the national park .
choosing large areas or larger values of w makes it easy to find alignments of 20 or more points .
this deal again made a stir amongst the real estate offices , and lot values went soaring ; and when i had erected a handsome business block on the property a regular `` boom '' set in .
every sinner adorns himself with it the moment his heart values christ .
we are concerned more with intrinsic values .
variation 5 engages in three-part imitative counterpoint with the chorale in the middle voice in longer note values .
these values and concepts include international cooperation , the support of all nations , peaceful use of military , scientific endeavor for the benefit of all humankind and environmental protection .
if we compare these figures with the inventory of the movable values existing at the end of december 1904 , we shall find an increase of £157,173,555 .
but i read this story and thought the cultural values and sentiments were very relatable .
this seemed such a fairy world in which they were living that things took on new values .
hence in practically all of the alcohol-check experiments , especially of short duration , with this calorimeter , the values for water are invariably somewhat too high .
here the term identity refers to the concept of a mathematical identity or a logical tautology , since it defines an equivalence which does not depend on the particular values of the variables .
when values of objects change from positive to negative , quick motor response associated with object skill still occurs and might thus undermine the subject .
5d. , to be paid on the day of klynt ’ s marriage : he gives r. leds a ring called a ryboys , which he values at £1:13:4 , to be paid on the day of his marriage or else at his hour of death .
the general problem consists in determining the probabilities that the values of one or of several linear functions of the errors of a very great number of observations are contained within any limits .
the metformin pka values make metformin a stronger base than most other basic drugs with less than 0 .
anderson foundation is to perpetuate shared values and continue the legacy that anderson left behind .
with a determined incision into this agglomeration of contradictory instincts , with the total suppression of its antagonistic values , with vivisection applied to its most _instructive_ case .
speculators tried to corner the 1/2c and 6c denominations , which advance particulars had shown to be the most desirable of the lower values , but the stamps were doled out carefully and large orders were promptly and firmly refused .
harris is the co-founder and ceo of project reason , a nonprofit foundation devoted to spreading scientific knowledge and secular values in society .
that the self-respecting young jew command the respect of the world without is of minor importance by the side of the outstanding fact that he has ceased to measure himself by the values which he imagined the unfriendly elements of the world without had set upon him .
that `` old-maidishness '' was composed of three elements : a fine discrimination of values , an appreciation of little things as pivots for greater things , and a love of orderliness .
in 1879 , the values were 620_l._ to austria , 380_l._ france , 1950_l._ great britain , 45,500_l._ greece , 280_l._ italy , 62,500_l._ turkey .
representations of individuals in which two individuals are much closer than they have similar values for all variables in all groups ; in practice the user particularly studies the first factorial plane .
consequently , the values and mores of a society predicates legislation prohibiting their taboos .
at the outset , and before laying out a course of study , they were compelled to meet and settle the aim of education and the problem of relative values .
this relative production changed very slowly , and in 1831-40 of the total in values produced 34.5 per cent .
in mathematics , a point process is a random element whose values are " point patterns " on a set s .
air pollutant emission factors are representative values that attempt to relate the quantity of a pollutant released to the ambient air with an activity associated with the release of that pollutant .
units also have ' skill ' and ' armour ' values .
the sign , called dirigu , has two values ending with _g_ ; i. e. , _dirig_ related to the sign-name and _síg_ which is quite certainly equal to _malû_ ( br .
never swayed by the values of the established class , he is a guy with easy composure and slightly slanted views , and always lives by his own principles .
if one of the features has a broad range of values , the distance will be governed by this particular feature .
the hôtel de rambouillet regulated the scale of social values and diminished the distance between the position accorded to science , intellect , and genius and the position accorded to birth .
conversely , if any lower semicontinuous multimap from topological space x to a banach space , with nonempty convex closed values admits continuous selection , then x is paracompact .
the institution of the family , for example , through the strong religious sanctions and values implied in the marriage ceremony and relationship ( especially the marriage sacrament of the catholic church ) , comes to be strongly fortified and entrenched .
unlike mrs. plimpton , for instance , she was so innately a lady that she had met with no resistance in the eastern watering places , and her sense of values had remained the truer for it .
all these companies have progressive values , but they 're not co-ops , " sparks ' explained to a reporter later .
thus the welfare analysis of oligopolies is sensitive to the parameter values used to define the market 's structure .
henceforward she would see collingwood as he was : the democrat whose democracy is but the ladder of ambition , the raw , self-made man reaching out an eager clutch for those finer things of life which he knows only by their ticketed values .
non-censorship and freedom of speech are core values of the wikimedia movement and the wikimedia foundation .
involute teeth. -- for tabular values look opposite `` pinion , '' under proper number of teeth , for each wheel .
all three values of this first set were issued imperforate and while the 3d , of which at least three millions were issued , varies but little in shade , the 6d , printed in comparatively small quantities , provides a number of striking tints .
i thank my above esteemed colleagues for their patience and dedication to true and good values and principles as this discussion proceeds .
of these values , as of all values , however , the law of equilibration holds .
the final analysis and evaluation of the forecasts was done starting april 1991 when the actual , final values of the data including december 1990 were known to the collaborating companies .
much the simplest way is to pay an income , as at present , and allow relative values to be adjusted according to demand .
we first assign different binary values to elements in the graph .
also , the uncolored jpg version of this image does have names instead of words ; my suspicion is that the image was numbered to make it easier for those on the commons to translate the numerical values into their own respective languages .
in diction , as well , all relative values are thrown to the winds .
monet 's painting carries the shorthand of form and broken colour to extremity ; the flowing touch of manet is chopped up into harsher , smaller notes of tone , and the pitch pushed up till all values approach the iridescent end of the register .
methods described in weighted _ mean can now help me to estimate the distribution of my values v _ i ( distribution of heights among my penguin population ) with mean m and variance v .
we need land , free roads into the ocean , and for the spirit and language and wares and trade of germany we need the same values that are accorded such goods anywhere else .
a similar relation exists between the values of indirect agents , and must exist between wages and rent .
`` the lord tristan will do well to pay heed to the summons , if he values that which lies nearest his heart . ''
fdle 's " four fundamental values " are " service , integrity , respect , and quality .
the values are traditionally , " one drink " , " two drinks " , " four drinks " , and " half a beer " .
now life abounds in these , and sometimes they are such critical and revolutionary experiences that they change a man 's whole scale of values and system of ideas .
the essential nature of the standpoint which calls it into existence , and of the abstraction which it performs , is to put in our possession the method by which values are introduced and effected in life .
`` that is true , '' quoth don quixote ; `` but my squire justly values the gift for the sake of the giver . ''
great britain is yet too powerful and values her remaining possessions too highly to make it possible for us to retain them at the peace , if we should conquer them by the war .
i never read books , so i have no sense of comparative values in literature , and consequently ca n't tell whether he is an inglorious shakespeare or a subject for the daily press .
do these kinds of compound labor show at the same period of time the same commodity values as simple labor , are they the expression of merely simple labor force ?
“ the world , ” writes po to yüan chēn , “ values highest just those of my poems which i most despise .
miss howe values not either fame or censure ; and thinkest thou , that this letter will not bring the little fury up , though she could procure no other conveyance than her higgler 's panniers , one for herself , the other for her maid ?
activists connect with others affiliated with their cause , causing new networks to form and shared values to be accentuated .
if the aristocracy of wealth , learning , and culture can provide us no adequate system of ends and values in life , would it not be well for us to borrow temporarily a few from the people ?
nonetheless , much demolition was necessary , and many freehold and leasehold interests had to be bought out at current property values .
this difference in horse-power on american farms gives us a great advantage over other countries -- so great an advantage indeed that our competition affects land values in europe , and is gradually forcing a readjustment of the industries of the world .
~dilution.~ -- the amount of dilution necessary -- cereal waters , whey , etc. -- to increase the digestibility and nutrient values of the formula .
his motto is " chritus primus " or " christ first " and is noted for his passionate homilies , care for the community , and support of traditional values .
show five values of green-yellow „ purple .
among a people well-accustomed to such a government , such a functionary may be bold : he may rely , if not on the parliament , on the nation which understands and values him .
as a witness to contrary values , his testimony must be discounted .
but he makes the mistake , not unusual with classical men , of supposing that he is a qualified critic of poetry ; and he , therefore , gives us a special dissertation upon the comparative values of english and greek poetry .
dib , the only four legal values of color depth were 1 , 4 , 8 , and 24 bits per pixel ( bpp ) .
he only values in me the hand that eases his pain and want of sleep .
these turkish graphemes represent similar sounds to their values in german ( see turkish alphabet ) .
calling m the coefficient of excess of pressure in front , and n the coefficient of deficiency of pressure behind , so that f = m + n , he found the following values : -- m = 1 ; n = 0.433 ; f = 1.433 .
even the primitive swazi values publicity .
the rate of foreclosures is increasing as the values remain low and governments are losing taxes to support services because of the decline in values .
numbers of stub articles in green also reflect actual values , but they should not be added to the total count of articles in a main category .
assembly language can support procedural or structured programming via its facilities for modifying register values and branching execution depending on program state .
however , he will probably be given values of vc and fz from the tool manufacturer .
until 1990 , gadna focused on instilling patriotic values in israeli youth and encouraging immigration of youth to israel .
individual variation is greater than the supposed subspecific values and the overlapping of size is marked .
“ i ought to rejoice that a true-hearted girl values my brother as he ought to be valued. ” mr. hartley did not speak for several minutes .
a friend of mine who has been collecting postage stamps , values his collection at that , and he hasn't begun to put the time and money into it i have put in this work .
the landlord is looking for the increase of the values of land , and is ever mindful of a possible buyer .
that which , when imbued with the sentimental values of firelight and silence , appeared necessary and right somehow appeared almost absurd when viewed in broad day .
you have disclosed to france the fabric of your soul , and you know that my country values above all the courage that can laugh and the dazzling chivalry that meets death , as we say , in white gloves .
the father was impressed with western values , so he decided to send his son , shah nawaz , to the united kingdom for his higher education .
goodwin , 1986 ) that , in a range of parameter values , instabilities may occur and develop in this system , leading to intracellular patterns of strain and calcium concentration .
the first stamps to be modified were the 12 and 24 pfennig values of the series depicting the president of the gdr wilhelm pieck .
though she carried on most of her negotiations through her cousin , she bargained with a firmness and a sense of values that i admired very much .
`` it will always be time for my affairs , miss paget , '' he urged , `` and i know how your father values your society ; and he well may value it .
in the united states wall newspapers were sometimes used by the communist movement as a training vehicle in youth and adult education groups , simultaneously teaching the elements of journalism while reinforcing the party 's values and ideology among readers .
digitalcolor meter is a utility for measuring and displaying the colour values of pixels displayed on the screen of a macintosh computer .
the proof of this will appear when we have examined the process by which the values of goods are adjusted , and this will help to prepare the way for a study of the sources of net profits , which are an all-important feature of actual business .
much of the natural ranges of larch and lodgepole pine lie in the national forests owned by the government , and careful studies have been made in recent years to determine the requirements , and the actual and comparative values of the two species .
in 2011 , jo starred in hit cable series i need romance , a sexually frank and funny comedy about a group of single thirty-something girlfriends navigating the dating scene in seoul , which boasted stylish and slick production values .
caraccioli 's work evolved a great deal over the half-century in which it was produced , and gradually reflected many modern values .
[ 117:1 ] these manias are the result of low values really placed on man himself .
final goals , or final values , are intrinsically valuable to an intelligent agent , whether an artificial intelligence or a human being , as an end in itself .
from the great berber dynasties of the almoravids and almohads to the militants seeking an islamic state in the 1990s , the call to return to true islamic values and practices has had social resonance and political power .
the result is that the citations all display incorrect values for " accessed on " or " retrieved on " .
the kumzaris practice islam and have traditional folk values .
we can find the value of b1 by examining all the possible values between 0 and p1-1 .
one is yellow-orange , with rgb values of approximately ( 224,160,64 ) .
egosyntonic is a psychological term referring to behaviors , values , feelings that are in harmony with or acceptable to the needs and goals of the ego , or consistent with one 's ideal self-image .
rightly or wrongly he values my advice .
she came and stood by his side , and one by one he took up the little canvasses , explaining his tones and masses and relative values .
to escape a family who does not share her values , mary befriends ann , a local girl who educates her still further .
the other objection is that the hope of winning the increased land values has been a great and needed incentive to the development of the country , and a legitimate compensation for the hardships of pioneering .
in its simple pathos , 'the man that corrupted hadleyburg ' in its morally salutary irony , present vital evidence of that same transvaluation of current moral values which marks the age of nietzsche and ibsen , of tolstoy and shaw .
but if the transcending will is over-individual , it reaches the absolute values of religion and metaphysics .
psl ( n ) does not necessarily induce a surjective map of the corresponding groups with values in some ( non algebraically closed ) field .
traditions of indonesia are traditions , beliefs , values , and customs that belong within the culture of indonesian people .
in the case of texts from the oldest historical periods we encounter hundreds of names that are genuinely sumerian , and here in view of the multiplicity of the phonetic values attaching to the signs used it is frequently difficult definitely to determine the reading of the names .
his theory , therefore , probably holds good in such cases , whatever be the solvent , if the proper values are given to the ionic velocities , i.e .
there would have been two values instead of one .
all other things equal , higher values of this ratio imply that a firm is more easily able to meet its obligations in the coming year .
certainly a school of social economy that deals only with foreign exchanges and rent and values and the virtues of direct taxes and indirect , and draws the curtain around the question of population , must be a singularly shallow affair .
the values shifted , and many worldly matters , many amusements , which had formerly appeared to him of vital importance , now began to appear slightly absurd .
the specie standard was gone ; the measure of values was lost ; a fluctuating paper money , ruinously depreciated , was the medium of all exchanges .
the very interests towards which they had seemed to be working , the values they had impressed upon those to whom they had given enlightenment to understand them , what were they in the balance ?
as a leading villager , pabitra always stands for the moral values in running the school affairs as well as his daily life .
and though that is not the majority of my business activities , i absolutely believe in investing in accordance with my beliefs and my values .
commissioned in 1979 and built in 1981 , it was criticized both for its aesthetic values and for security reasons .
in proportion as this occurred , however , did the life of the present , deprived of its former values , relinquish all cherished desires in favour of that heavenly world possible to all men regardless of class , calling , or nationality .
aesthetic experience as axiologyin his musical or philosophical essays and papers , he stressed the relevance of values in the aesthetic experience considered as a counterpoint of hermeneutic gestures .
there is a department devoted to diet , food values , and recipes , and one devoted to hygiene , with special emphasis on child care .
illustrations of the five values will be found as nos .
second , and third type of historic landmark ( some places may be designated as more than one ) ; same accepted values as pahistoric _ type .
“ i see. ” john ’ s eyes followed phillip ’ s , and the scene , to his surprise , took on new values .
indeed it has nothing to do , in strictness , with meanings and purposes and values anywhere .
within this context , watson developed a theory of caring in nursing that involves values , a will and a commitment to care , knowledge , caring actions , and consequences .
the microprocessor cannot statically determine , prior to execution , if the memory locations specified in these two instructions are different , or are the same location , because the locations depend on the values in r2 and r4 .
rembrandt works with values in the same way as delacroix does with colours .
in politics , indeed , the preaching of reason as opposed to feeling is peculiarly ineffective , because the feelings of mankind not only provide a motive for political thought but also fix the scale of values which must be used in political judgment .
this bank has recently issued a series of stamp deposit cards , on which are spaces for stamps of different values to be affixed .
to search for human qualities and human values which give spirit .
_neglect as well as emphasis involved in relative values._ a question now arises about the relative values among these details .
if we follow the current through all its different values until we are back at the same value as we started with and ready to start all over , then we have followed through a cycle of values .
the protein values were always normal .
the _ester_ or _ether value_ , or number of milligrammes of koh required for the saponification of the neutral esters or glycerides in 1 gramme of fat , is represented by the difference between the saponification and acid values .
against the musical values he heard in this music , the massive scale , intricate structure , and textural complexity of the little russian 's first movement became distasteful .
such a longitudinal section will , through the indicated distribution of values , show the shape of the ore-body -- a step necessary in estimating quantities and of the most fundamental importance in estimating the probabilities of ore extension beyond the range of the openings .
the mines of butte have become known as copper mines , and the wonderful records they have made are ample testimony to the fact that the change in the prevailing metallic values has not wrought serious havoc in the mining industry of the district .
at first , what they taught and what they represented were my majors , but when i came to shift and reconstruct values , some of them climbed down off their pedestals , and my knee lost some of its flexibility .
most obd-ii pids or derived values may be displayed .
the problem involves the recognition of interesting ranges of values and the determination of pleasing space relations for those values .
he did not ( of course ) exaggerate miss angela 's values , magnify anything about her whatever .
unlike browning , f. t. had no eye for values .
nancy and jeanette had been early trained to buy wisely and well , and knew good values as well as up-to-the-minute styles .
and what is true of him is likewise true of the rent receiver , and of the person who profits by the `` unearned increment '' of land values .
this process of readjustment of overcapitalized values obviously involves loss ; but readjustment there must be .
the limits in these examples exist , but have different values , showing that the two-variable function xy has no limit at the point ( 0,0 ) .
a mill run made some time ago showed values as follows : $ 16.40 in gold , 1½ per cent copper and 60 cents silver per ton , a total value of $ 22.40 per ton .
this shows that each of these values is , in most cases if not in all , a norm for that particular canal ; a value distinctive of it and to which it either absolutely or relatively conforms .
the values of the copper , silver and gold coinages relative to one another were not fixed until 1903 .
as a role model , she 's shown others how to handle fame with grace and good humor while never backing down from her values or goals .
pending the assessing of the values of the arable land , which naturally required time , the government resorted to the issuance of inconvertible notes and other measures of purely temporary and irregular nature .
the values that emms international seeks to express are faithfulness , empowerment , encouragement , and accountability .
this has values which are different from each other , and which can be compared and assigned , but which do not necessarily have any particular concrete representation in the computer 's memory ; compilers and interpreters can represent them arbitrarily .
sarah trimmer was prompted to publish the guardian of education by the flood of new children 's books on the market early in the nineteenth century and by her fear that those books might contain french revolutionary values .
another mode of securing to retiring policyholders the benefit of the reserve values of their insurances is that known as the _non-forfeiture system_ .
the training methods described above are discriminative training methods , because they seek to find a function g that discriminates well between the different output values ( see discriminative model ) .
the physiological values were not properly appreciated until about twenty years later .
in 2014 kohhanovsky published the new book , called the mismatch ( несовпаденье ) , about the " mismatch of my set of moral values with those dominant today , " as he explained .
he could put out his hand and touch sand , drift , spray ; yet they were a setting where something lay hidden behind that setting -- something watched , calculatingly , with intelligence , and a set of emotions and values he did not , could not share .
her pain is unbearable and , with her act of violence , she feels that she has betrayed herself or rather all the values that her character represents .
it was observed that for many of the machines which were removed , the germans merely indicated the inventory values after reduction for depreciation and not the replacement value of the machines .
below is a table of romania 's neighboring countries , their gdp per capita , and trade values between the pairs .
her core values are integrity , service , and excellence .
for as the universe is one , so the individual human souls that apprehend it have no varying values intrinsically , but one equal value .
whenever the jews did enter the struggle they did so of their own free will , with no anxiety for the weal or woe of a nation , but only to fight for spiritual values , for ideas .
`` after all , '' said torrence , `` it is simply the inversion of values ; for what could be more beautiful than some of our rhinestones , or even than some of our colored glass ?
we are interested in odd values of n because any even value of n trivially has the number 2 as a prime factor .
they attach numerical ( and emotional ) values to their inputs ( work , capital ) and to their possessions ( assets , natural endowments ) .
european culture did not know where to place two-spirits , since their own ideals and values regarding gender and sexuality were in place to suppress exactly this kind of behavior ( roscoe , 1991 , p .
there are areas of intact creek with high ecological values in the lower catchment and it is important to protect them through upper catchment works .
keynes described the conference as a clash of values and worldviews of the principal leaders .
the word values always refers to the relationship of the individual masses or tones in our imagined scale from black to white .
this is how he states his case : -- [ 1 ] `` the individual whose effort creates values for which society pays receives service income .
value of money and values of goods determine prices ; prices and quantity of goods determine demand for money ; demand and supply of money determine value of money , -- a hopeless circle .
we have summarized these new data , and they give values very close to those already published .
it then became clear to many who remained in the aaa that while there were organized bodies arguing strongly against scientific methods and values , there was no equivalent voice dedicated to arguing for them .
new agricultural laws have been passed to meet difficulties which have arisen with already increased production and land values ; everything in fact has been done and is being done to second and enhance nature ’ s gifts .
deleuze , following marx , welcomes capitalism 's destruction of traditional social hierarchies as liberating , but inveighs against its homogenization of all values to the aims of the market .
to design the mirror , the output current must be related to the two resistor values r1 and r2 .
the australian and new zealand vitamin decoder by dr kate short ; tabulating device giving information on values , toxicity and rdi , published in melbourne , australia , 1991-1995 .
every investment in personal security is threatened by this process of inflation , and the real values of the people 's savings , whether in the form of insurance , bonds , pension and retirement funds or savings accounts are thereby shriveled .
the values are ( see _europ .
show me someone who would speedy-undelete something that should be deleted merely because of some arbitrary five day thing , and i 'll show you someone who values process to the point of actively interfering with and hampering doing the right thing .
the plan is intended to provide guidance for " preserving and enhancing wilderness values while offering opportunities for solitude and primitive recreation , as well as managing other land uses and activities " .
while pipe banners are not revered in the military as regimental or king 's or queen 's colours , they are , however , considered to be important due to their historical values and their associations with authoritative establishments .
the postmile values increase from the beginning of a route within a county to the next county line .
instead values of chosen parameters of materials " transform " , or alter , during a certain time period .
these are not ratios , but values in currency .
at the present time , when the state is engrossed by economic and other constantly changing problems of the day , we need a community which attaches paramount importance to the inner problems of humanity and which directs our life towards eternal aims and values .
lucas has focused on promoting and transmitting the importance of values to children and young people in the state of sonora .
at a very basic level , the registry is composed of " keys " and " values " which are similar in some ways to folders and files .
many thousand determinations of reflection-factor and of approximate hue were made for these types of areas , and upon the mean values camouflage for low visibility as viewed from above was developed .
the intersection of the curves identifies an aggregate equilibrium in the economy where there are unique equilibrium values for interest rates and economic output .
he delivered five lectures on a variety of topics and issues relating to australia , architecture and design and prevailing cultural values of the time , under the series title ' artificial australia .
we may , therefore , continue to use the numbers resulting from bischoff's calculation , even though we admit the probability that they differ widely from the true values of the periods we are considering .
it was turner , delacroix , courbet and daumier who entered the sacred temple , tore down the pillars which had supported it for centuries , and brought the entire structure of established values crashing down about them .
though the mine is the richest copper proposition i have ever seen -- besides carrying gold values sufficient to cover smelting expenses -- it would never pay , as you say , to ship it out at present prices .
for hdtv the atsc decided to change the basic values for wr and wb compared to the previously selected values in the sdtv system .
such differences include the values , behavior , education , and customs of the respective cultures .
in simpler terms , nutation ( and precession ) values are important in observation from earth for calculating the apparent positions of astronomical objects .
within these limits it may be neglected in making the calculations necessary to compare the minimum consumption values for tests with different percentages of alcohol .
a driving force in this expansion was for the daughters of camp dudley alumni to have a place to learn the same ethics and values that their sons could learn at camp dudley .
if , as i have tried to show in my `` philosophy of religion '' , the innermost core of all religion is faith in the persistence of value in the world , and if the highest values express themselves in the cry `` excelsior ! ''
even the fuse settings were automatically set from the range values coming from the radar .
this fusion of the two folds named in _mycetes_ results in giving different values to the dorsal vascular fold in its proximal and distal segments .
it is also a common practise to extend the ordinate axis a little beyond the extreme values , i believe for aesthetical reasons .
the show features high production values coupled with an up-beat style of delivery while maintaining the standard news format .
the values of these conductivities depend on local time , latitude , season and solar 11- year cycle .
he was a recipient of the vimy award , which recognizes a canadian who has made a significant and outstanding contribution to the defence and security of the canadian nation and the preservation of its democratic values .
tunku aziz joined the democratic action party ( dap ) in august 2008 , citing shared " values and ideals " with the party .
his critics forgot that ibsen was a skilled deviser of theatric effects , and such an unconventional exit was not without its artistic values .
this observation was explained by a model of the cone wall composed of wrapped graphene sheets , where the geometrical requirement for seamless connection naturally accounted for the semi-discrete character and the absolute values of the cone angle .
because the brightness distribution must be real and positive everywhere , the visibility function cannot take on arbitrary values in unsampled regions .
in the national point of view , the profitableness of the foreign export trade , as compared with colonial , would seem more dubious still , when the values left and distributed among the producing classes are taken into calculation .
not less so if we appreciate the magnitude of the values resulting from it .
it brings us back once more to `` values '' ; and whether our `` values '' are values of taste or values of devotion what matter ?
residuals are the deviations of observed values of the dependent variable from the values obtained by segmented regression on the first independent variable .
the savage 's idea of values was very crude until the government , in attempting to civilize and make a gentleman of him , has transformed him into a bewildered child .
it is the _worship_ of money that i wish to consider : the belief that all values may be measured in terms of money , and that money is the ultimate test of success in life .
the moral life and the construction of values and standards [ 64 ] james hayden tufts writing about ethics has tended to take one of two directions .
at the very core of the business are a set of shared values .
`` they call the peeces of money roopees , of which there are some of divers values , the meanest worth two shillings and threepence , and the best two shillings and ninepence sterling .
the divorcing for inspection of the field of production from the rest of the machinery of civilization has brought into practice a false method , and the values arrived at have been unhappily half-truths .
the last-named locality , being a small province of the argentine republic , has issued the same die for two several values .
scatter plot - type of mathematical diagram using cartesian coordinates to display values as collection of points for two variables for a set of data .
to stop the mill because values were falling would be impossible without utter disorganization , and its attendant heavy loss , while to keep on manufacturing stock goods with a certainty that they would be worth less each succeeding month is a disheartening prospect for the mill .
every one knows what his mind is , and every one values his judgment .
discrete time views values of variables as occurring at distinct , separate " points in time " , or equivalently as being unchanged throughout each non-zero region of time ( " time period " ) .
we get from his book a sense of geographical values which readers of the bible too seldom feel .
if it is a case of cause and effect , and the interval between the solar and terrestrial phenomena does not exceed a few hours , then there should be a sensible connexion between corresponding daily values of the sun-spot frequency and the magnetic range .
in philosophy and media studies , a knowledge space is described as an emerging anthropological space in which the knowledge of individuals becomes the primary focus for social structure , values , and beliefs .
as well , eventually , the similarity does not occur by direct repetition , but by presenting in two ( or more ) set of relations , some common values or patterns .
though they do not imply each other in the world of logic , they are mutually necessary in the world of values .
i had never seen the relative values of the two moneys so well illustrated before .
it appears that he chose the representative instead of the spirit itself , -- that he chose consciously or unconsciously , it matters not , -- the lower set of values in this dualism .
however , it is not until all the ecological requirements of the location are satisfied that economic values of species are considered .
the items may be nodes or atomic values .
he discussed lightly the relative values of vegetable stuffs , doubtful of those containing abundance of phosphates such as lentils .
those initiatives are completed through recreation activities aiming to promote the values of friendship , respect and tolerance among children , as well as nurturing their creativity and their self-perception of their rights .
it was primarily land values that were being overcapitalized , and the process went on to such an extent that the annual land revenues of the government now exceeded the total governmental receipts from all sources of a few years before .
others , like author fabian pascal , have stated a belief that " how the function calculation should treat missing values is not governed by the relational model .
the shares in the profits are based on the cash values of the different contributions .
their own silver or copper weight is , therefore , not determined by the proportions of the respective values of silver and copper to that of gold , but is arbitrarily fixed by law .
some people believe that liantinis took his own life as a protest against what he saw as the lack of values in modern greek society .
by representing a single point in space ( the computer ) and time ( the number of intervals ) , the chance of a collision in values is effectively nil .
five values form a safe value range for small objects .
inc strongly supports liberal nationalism , a kind of nationalism compatible with values of freedom , tolerance , equality , and individual rights .
providing confidence values for the current hypothesized classifier based on the number of correctly classified vs .
he was the simplifier of planes and values , who advocated frankness and freedom of expression , and detached painting from all the absurdities and abstractions of the classic and romantic periods .
whereas reagan 's narrative focused heavily on individualism , obama used the metaphor of hope to call for a balance between those individual values and community values , the latter also being necessary for the achievement of the american dream .
the row also demonstrates some other characteristic features of the composer 's 12-tone technique , including the use of constant rhythmic values , no octave transpositions within the series , and the row 's use frequently as an accompanimental ostinato .
following łukasiewicz 's early work , korzybski and later proponents of general semantics associate these truth values with probabilities and the use of scientific induction .
the transvaluation of values the gradual emancipation of women that has been going on for the last century has still a long way to proceed before they are wholly delivered from their traditional burdens and so stand clear of the oppressions of men .
you folks out here know all about mines and values .
the values will , of course , not be real numbers , but i would hope them to form an ordered field , and hold some natural properties such as coincidence with the classical sum when it exists , linearity , additivity and so on .
`` monsieur poincar , speaking at bordeaux , said that henceforth france must seek to retain by all possible means the ping-pong championship of the world : values in the city collapsed at once. '' ...
it now remains to generalize this approach to higher values of k .
and since the modern woman knows that , in the sphere of spiritual values , nothing can be attained without sacrifice , she prefers to keep free agency and to sacrifice love .
in the 1980s they became majority black and retained high property values .
or in other words they used values as a " post-hoc justification of their attitudes ( emotions ) and behaviors " .
association values differ systematically between types of stimuli .
with this as a daily experience , a man 's values changed rapidly ; and it became quite obvious that , even to begin to fight the battle of christianity in the modern world , christians must be united .
market values crumbled as rapidly as they had risen .
the goal of the lamprey river instream flow assessment and water management plan is the determination of protected instream flow ( pisf ) values for designated reaches .
rova tended to reflect the values of her follywood roots , and thus had a great fondness of things such as the group 's public image , or her own ( both in and out of costume ) .
`` but i was n't quite sure about the values of that . ''
thus , the importance of an equilibrium constants lies in the fact that , once their values have been determined by experiment , they can be used to calculate the concentrations , known as the speciation , of mixtures that contain the relevant species .
when , therefore , you put aside your preconceived ideas , your self-centred scale of values , and let intuition have its way with you , you open up by this act new levels of the world .
one of the great mistakes religion has made in the past has been this very lack of sympathy for values of all kinds .
social instability and shock made equally pertinent and obvious the remark that only intelligence can confirm the values that natural conditions generate , and that intelligence is itself nurtured and matured only in a free and stable society .
declare a field that can only be assigned values as part of the declaration or in a constructor in the same class .
in some places they have become the real money and have regular set values .
the league actively supports all proposals in parliament for separate valuation of land , and for making land values the basis of national and local taxation .
the key is identifying and unlocking the values which provide the best return on investment in ways that can be measured by utilities .
this latter value , we find , by computing by the formula given above , using the four terms whose values lie nearest to the _y_ axis , is 5.25 secs .
if he does it ( and she shows how she values him by wanting it ) it is still a way of getting and keeping near her -- of making for _her_ , to him , a tie of gratitude .
however , local residents and business owners have continually struck down the idea , claiming that the thoroughfare will cause decreased property values and increased noise , destroy the ambiance of gandy blvd , and keep customers away from local businesses .
survival values , 77 .
under this third head would be included those subjects of a pictorial nature whose composition and values are such as to make them reconcilable to a decorative use by means of borders or very defined edges , as in the illustration by mr. a. campbell cross , fig .
meantime , through protestantism the values , the meanings formerly characterizing the next life ( the opportunity for full perception of perfect being ) , were carried over into present-day emotions and responses .
his white sailor suit seemed to give his ugliness its full values .
to meet these demands and at the same time guarantee “ benefit and enjoyment ” of yosemite values for future generations of visitors is one of the most exacting tasks engaged in by public servants anywhere .
months before , the fumes of the wine of gambling had gone to its head ; and then the public had been made sober suddenly by the “ shrinkage in quoted values , ” otherwise the shearing .
of bismuth oxid obtained to bismuth ( bi ) , the following values are obtained : bismuth tribromphenolate , research council specimen : bismuth , 44.8 per cent .
it is doubtful if there ever is a time when all stocks have advanced beyond their real values , but when the great majority of stocks have so advanced , there is likely to be a general decline in all stock prices .
a man who happens to stand on an eminence has few such friends and he values those he has . ''
i supplied some reasonable values for them both .
these food budgets have been arranged with due consideration for food values and variety , although of course the tastes of many families might require a somewhat different combination of articles .
each pixel of an image consists of three values for the brightness of the red ( r ) , green ( g ) and blue ( b ) portions of the color .
cristea 's discourse incorporated national elements , arguing that the orthodox faith was part of the romanian soul and he argued that the church 's values include " patriotism " and " obedience towards authorities " alongside " faith and morality " .
and these again will give values of the masses of the bodies forming the solar system , which are important data in computing their motions .
this set was re-printed in 1943 , with three existing values ( 10 , 25 and 50 drachmae ) in different colors from the originals and three new values ( 100 , 200 and 400 drachmae ) .
in the long run a nation loses power in proportion as her system of faith disregards moral values .
a confusion of values is likely to take place when we try to `` do something '' for american literature .
remember that parameters and values are case sensitive .
the third function might be defined as one that maps each ordinal to the smallest ordinal that cannot yet be described with the above two functions and previous values of this function .
he carried himself with grace and a remarkable ability to work with people ; he possessed inherent charm ; he was a quick study , with a strong sense of realism and unquestioned ethical values .
color all the parts separately in bright contrasting values to bring out the outlines of the arms and other parts of the figures .
the tentative breakpoint that provides the largest coefficient of determination ( as a parameter for the fit of the regression lines to the observed data values ) is selected as the true breakpoint .
competent cld workers will ensure that their work supports social change and social justice and is based on the values of cld .
western ( particularly american ) goods or an infusion of western and especially american cultural values that competes with the local culture .
now while the little clam is excellent eating just as soon as opened from the shell , taking care to waste none of his precious juices , his elder brother also has inestimable gastronomic values .
_maš_ : the sign has two names , bâru and mâšu , and two chief values related to these names , _bar_ and _maš_ .
it became obvious that box office returns of very low budget pornographic films could fund further advances in the technical and production values of porn , making it extremely competitive with hollywood movies .
certain it is that there is no use in comparing the reaction times for different senses or different qualities of stimuli unless the relative values of the stimuli are taken into consideration ; but how are these values to be determined unless some such index as variability is available ?
but whether viewed as a philosophy or a religion buddhism has no personal god , who loves and values men as his own children made in his own image , and ready to come to their help .
committee 's values .
george albert coe , re-valuer of values .
prescott values the spanish ducat of 1490 at 39_s._ 4_d._ , and macaulay states that of florence in 1340 at 40_s._ sterling , while sismondi calculates it at about 48 francs .
it determines values .
the egyptian hieroglyphic writing system was the first notation system to have phonetic values .
our faces are set toward strange worlds presently to rise out of the sea and take on form and colour and substance -- worlds of new aspirations , of new ideas and new values .
he was an ethicist who rejected the contemporary values of greece .
if the friction be relatively small , all the normal modes are of this character , and unless two or more values of [ sigma ] are nearly equal the elliptic orbits are very elongated .
the market values of these goods typically rely on both the nature of material and its arrangements .
the indian most values the red willow because from its bark he makes what to him is a very good substitute for tobacco .
the grand total of speculative politeness laid out upon us was therefore more than half a dollar ; but , on our selecting two porters , values rapidly declined , and the market '' closed in a depressed condition . ''
now , the effect of this extraordinary proposal would be that the whole of the papers would have to be kept in circulation till the last candidate was elected , with diminishing compound fractional values .
if the set of possible color values is sufficiently small , each of those colors may be placed on a range by itself ; then the histogram is merely the count of pixels that have each possible color .
bill of rights and acl and ( ii ) the method of developing acl norms in line with the values and rights of the constitution .
on december 8 , 1938 , the army leadership had instructed all officers to be thoroughly well versed in national socialism and to apply its values in all situations .
many years must pass before all the values will find their proper level .
he sums this up stating , " in a society which sends messages that are racists capitalists , and have judaeo-christian ethic roots , the transmission of these messages to black people can lead to socializing of their young with non-complementary values .
american policy was based on a failure to undersatnd that other people , other nations , may have a different set of priorities , a different set of values and a different set of aims .
if some n _ i values are small ( i .
there was considerable difficulty in setting proper values on the hundreds of buildings , large and small , owned by the railroad .
but do the values determined by these equations merit the preference over all those which may be obtained by other means ?
the relation of these two values is , say , ‹one to fifteen› .
we all understand that the notes of the astors , and stewarts , and vanderbilts , though issued by millions , and tens of millions , are really worth their nominal values .
despite the fact that communism was an urban phenomenon ( albeit with rustic roots ) - it abnegated these `` bourgeoisie '' values .
the significance of receptivity feature was first considered by nel noddings in 1984 , but did not receive further attention in the ethics of care neither was it used to criticize typical western philosophical values .
and all was light.= _pope._ =nature and truth , though never so low or vulgar , are yet pleasing when openly and artlessly represented.= _pope._ =nature builds upon a false bottom , seeks herself what she values in others , and is oftentimes deceived and disappointed .
a new attitude or set of values also would not help .
this table presents some values depending on these profiles .
from 1995 to 1997 , he conducted an inquiry into values at the world bank .
he seemed altogether like a child whose emotional values did not stand clear .
in forth , it is used to fetch values from the address on the top of the stack .
in more general use , a calibration curve is a curve or table for a measuring instrument which measures some parameter indirectly , giving values for the desired quantity as a function of values of sensor output .
the advent of small trades over the internet such as through amazon and ebay have largely bypassed the involvement of customs in many countries because of the low individual values of these trades .
from face value , it is hardly possible that these values will command a premium for many years to come .
if the values of all variables in a propositional formula are given , it determines a unique truth value .
the values overprinted v.r.i .
to use the various equations developed above , values are needed for the mean and variance of the several parameters that appear in those equations .
any such encroachment is indeed inadmissible , unless the margin is at least more than sufficient to provide for future expenses , and in any case care must be taken to guard against what are called `` negative values . ''
“ now , yeabel , ” continued saul , still kneeling over the constable , -- “ now , old blade , i 'll leave thee wi ' ponto ; but doa n't thee move or call out , if thee values thy old droat .
educational aims and educational values by =paul h. hanus= , of harvard university .
the book created controversy because of its attacks on american life-styles and values .
as to educational values there is a widespread misunderstanding .
the consonant values of _w_ and _y_ are never terminal in a syllable , but are followed in the same syllable by a vowel .
it is not cynicism exactly that the place breeds , and i never met anyone who was sentimental in mesopotamia , but it is a kind of descent that occurs to a level of values that are coloured black and white , quite plain .
therefore , the transfer characteristic takes a range of values .
`` volume of trade , '' far from being dependent on `` physical capacities and technique , '' is almost indefinitely flexible , with changing tone of the market , with changing values , and with other changes , including changes in the volume of money and credit .
common examples of this are the use of reserved values , where , for example , a function returning a positive number may return -1 to indicate failure , and sentinel values , most often used in tagged pointers .
the dielectric constants were enhanced from values there were less than 10 to approximately 400 .
he did not obtain general expressions for the coefficients which arose in the expansion of his generating functions , but he gave the actual values to a high order of the coefficients which arise from the generating functions corresponding to various conditions of partitionment .
the language regarding this specific dispute are most sufficient and relevant as " gmc declined offers by several animal sanctuaries to allow the oxen to retire at no cost to the school , saying that the offers did not align with the values of a sustainable , production-based farm .
some sheep-men had the bench and were discussing the relative values of different dips .
the problem of determining the error locations has therefore been reduced to the problem of finding , given a sequence of n-k values , the smallest set of elementary waves into which these values can be decomposed .
pixels take only integer values , so some approximation is always at work .
mib object values from other mib modules , that are defined as lying within this subtree ) .
marvellous values , really . ''
this feeling for values was so remarkable that it enabled him to produce an impression with three or four tones .
at the same time , realizing that the church represents the female values of his mother , tony cannot bring himself to accept the lawlessness , violence and unthinking sensuality which his father and older brothers symbolize .
but there are two exhibits in the possession of the prosecution which illustrate the contempt in which the nazis held human values .
the aim of the cprs was , in essence , to affirm the importance of a comprehensive understanding of the traditional chinese cultural values and painting techniques as a viable developing strategy for the future of chinese painting .
the two jacks of the opposite colour stay in their normal suit and retain their normal ranks and card-point values .
the whites are opaque , the solid blacks are clear glass , the intermediate tones showing the same values in stipples of various sizes .
the abjad numbers are also used to assign numerical values to arabic words for purposes of numerology .
one after another , plug into x definite values am ( i .
your opinions listed on your userpage show that you have values and morals , and you are kind to others .
the party said it was " based on traditional conservative values " , and they self-defined as " one nation conservatives " .
labor is the common factor of economic values .
the following table of values , calculated from these formulae , is taken from the _brit .
for silently , unobtrusively , when constantly attended to , a work of art will transform the background of values out of which action springs .
it is not claimed that values are never mined below an elevation that is a thousand feet from the surface .
the general place of the negro in agriculture is shown also by the fact that more than four-fifths of the farm acreage and farm values of the state are in the hands of the whites .
this notion is similar to the one in computer science where defaults are settings or values that are automatically assigned outside of user intervention .
jimmy was less sensitive to values .
this error message indicates that a parameter has been assigned a value that is not a member of the parameter 's defined set of acceptable values .
transvalue values -- what does this mean ?
the latter is the usual course for small corrections , and it is convenient to calculate the correction corresponding to each cubic centimeter and to record it in the form of a table or calibration card , or to plot a curve representing the values .
the episode marks the first appearance of robert llewellyn 's kryten , hattie hayridge 's version of holly , the new spaceship starbug , better production values , and a change in direction of story themes that would cement the show 's cult status .
the subtraction linked list is also special in that the entire list can be relocated in memory without needing any patching of pointer values , since adding a constant offset to each address in the list will not require any changes to the values stored in the link fields .
our system values productive people and unproductive people equally , and there are administrators with less than a dozen page creations to their credit .
irish lions and a man who epitomised the very ethos of the game and its values .
with his familiarity with the cree mental make-up and his french instinct for dramatic values , he held them breathless by the narration of this odyssey of the north .
the values , it is as well to mention , are given in gold dollars , the equivalent in salvadorean dollars being $ 2,186,495.80 .
even with the two of them at work it took a long time , and when it was finished and the values of the various currencies adjusted , calamity made some hurried calculations on paper .
everything floated -- drawing , values , colours -- for there was not sufficient knowledge to hold and determine the place of any one .
it has been read as a parable about the destruction of victorian social values and the disintegration of pre-world war i english society , and goole 's final speech has been interpreted variously as a quasi-christian vision of hell and judgement , and as a socialist party manifesto .
it indicts and convicts them as juggling with the symbols of value to the destruction of real values .
it requires that developers firstly avoid harm to wetlands , but if harm is considered unavoidable , then wetland habitat of similar function and values must be " protected , enhanced or restored " to compensate for those that will be damaged .
a general or common game solution is a strategy or interaction order for the agents which satisfies or realizes the relevant norms and values of the players .
in farm lighting batteries , the different types have different values of specific gravity when fully charged .
it is true that accurate determinations of the atomic weights of different elements do not by any means harmonise with the values which prout ’ s law requires ; nevertheless the agreement in so many cases is so close that one can scarcely regard the coincidence as accidental .
strategy and national environmental action plan for syria , 2003 , accessed on october 31 , 2009 surface water pollution reduces real estate values next to the river and its branches , as well as the recreational value of the river .
with a partitioning algorithm such as the one described above ( even with one that chooses good pivot values ) , quicksort exhibits poor performance for inputs that contain many repeated elements .
the irreversible character of this process is strikingly embodied in fourier 's theory of the conduction of heat , where the formulae themselves indicate , for all positive values of the time , a possible solution which continually tends to the form of a uniform diffusion of heat .
we 've become a great middle-class country ; middle-class values sustain us .
unlike algol blocks , rebol blocks are composite values similar to quoted s-expressions in lisp .
then the two repeated integrals have different values 0 and 1 .
philosophy , far from alienating us from those values , should teach us to see their perfection and to maintain them in our ideal .
in the bal sanskar kendras , children are taught indian culture and values through stories and tales , and in the tatvadnyana vidyapeeth ( philosophical university ) at thane students are taught indian and western philosophy , comparative religion , logic , sanskrit , vedic rites and rituals .
the vowels , although used in the words , have no figure values , neither do `` w , '' `` y , '' or `` h , '' when not a part of `` sh '' or `` ch . ''
quigley 's village was a long-running collection of christian children 's videos designed to teach children " sound biblical values " in a fun and exciting way .
the values issued were 1 cent , 2 cents , 5 cents , 6 cents , 10 cents , 15 cents and 20 cents .
notice , too , the arrangement of values -- the light foam , the darker sky and ocean , the wet sand , and the solid mainland .
large amounts of noise pollution not only lead to lower property values and high frustration , they can be damaging to human hearing and health .
ch2 ) would result in loss of a hydrogen-bond participatory atom , such a substitution is expected to have more subtle effects resulting from a change in the dipole of the molecule , such as slight changes in hydrogen bonding or pka values of the unchanged hydroxyl groups .
the wilderness committee values wilderness , with all its natural bio-diversity , as absolutely vital to the health of people , communities and the planet .
search engine optimization encompasses both " on page " factors ( like body copy , title elements , h1 heading elements and image alt attribute values ) and off page optimization factors ( like anchor text and pagerank ) .
renaissance authors believed that the sack of rome by the gothic tribes in 410 had triggered the demise of the classical world and all the values they held dear .
soon , after a bootleg released by the band became popular in the ussr , kgb forced naumov to leave novosibirsk medical university for " promulgation of decadent western values , " and he sought safety first in leningrad and later in moscow .
for isotopes with atomic mass unit values less than that of the most abundant stable isotope , 106pd , the primary decay mode is electron capture with the primary decay product being rhodium .
they need not be reminded of the main tenets of his thought , or of the fundamental values upon which he based his life and his political activities .
he left all behind that the world values , but he reached forth and pressed forward toward the goal , for the prize of the high calling of god in christ jesus .
since the early 1980s , williams has intentionally adopted production values associated with fine art or straight photography into a practice that explores sculptural ideas using photographs and installation .
they are loaded with the expectation of permanency and universality rendered impossible in the new pragmatic framework of permissiveness , local values , instant gratification , change , and interconnectedness .
to enable this oracle to be read with an intelligent and proper understanding it is important that one be fully informed as to all the possible values or interpretations of the cards , singly and in combination .
the drift of the propeller may be conveniently divided into the following component values : _active drift_ , produced by the useful thrusting part of the propeller .
the opening years of the century witnessed a revolt against these two systems ; and the leading characteristic of twentieth century thought , over against an agnostic naturalism and a pantheistic or impersonal absolutism , has been its reaffirmation of spiritual values .
besides the gripping human drama displayed in this series , there is also an implicit message throughout , about the social decay of many traditional values of today 's society .
but neither wife nor child ever heeded or even understood the temperamental values , and so some part of him had grown hardened to their inroads .
but the single taxers were annoyed by the final disappearance of the land values duties ( the only original feature of mr. lloyd george 's epoch-making first budget ) .
the postmile values start over again at each county line .
because hugo had loved her , mitchel thought she contained depths and values which did not appear .
the mission of les percussions de guinée is to educate the people of the world about guinean traditional values through music , drums , dance , and the storytelling of africa 's rich cultural legacy .
the values of c1 , c2 , c3 , α1 , α2 and α3 have to be determined .
but the lord looketh upon the heart , not the brain or the hand ; he values the worker , not the work ; the love , not the achievement .
without the labour of the middle ages , without the storm and stress of the reform of learning , they had the faculty of seeing things clearly and judging their values reasonably , without superstition .
balancing the two testimonies , at their intrinsic values , any man would unhesitatingly accept merle 's as the more reliable .
the pro-european orientation was a consequence of a " general understanding of fundamental values of the world civilization .
he then took a period of two years , and being misled by the erroneous values he had already obtained , he _missed one rotation_ , getting a value two minutes too great .
fill the spaces with air and with values -- even more important !
for generating random permutations of a given sequence of n values , it makes no difference whether one applies a randomly selected permutation of n to the sequence , or chooses a random element from the set of distinct ( multiset ) permutations of the sequence .
in practice , each of these values may be expressed as a proportion of the total potassium present , as only relative , not absolute , quantities are required .
same colors , values and designs , soft porous paper , perforated 12 .
superfluous or misnamed parameters will be ignored ; undefined parameters will be assigned default values .
there are many that demand imperatively some adjustments in inner comradeship and in mechanical arrangements surrounding the household , in order to hold firm its spiritual values during changes in social conditions .
the very thought of continued progress implies that man can look back at the successive stages of the past and say of each : in that lay values which i , to-day and always , can recognize as good , although i believe we have more good now .
it is argued that this cultural capital manifests into specific values , attitudes or social norms which in turn guide the behavioural intentions that individuals adopt in regard to particular decisions or courses of action .
; social organism , 16 , 577 ; social `` oversoul , '' 16 ; `` social use-value , '' 12 ; social _vs._ individual values , 43-45 .
all objects deposited with this society , including gold and silver , and especially all articles composing its balance , were to be arranged in an exchange tariff , which would be continually changeable , and the object of which was to secure the equivalence of values .
in a second step ( the matching of attribute-values ) the authors again used direct text comparative methods , and checked whether the values could be identified as homophones , to exclude mismatches caused by spelling mistakes in the text .
sasvo promoted values like volunteerism , self-reliance , love of africa , regional cooperation and unity , interchange of people of diverse backgrounds , responsibility towards community , leadership development , gender equality , and physical involvement in development .
the bcm attacked what they saw as traditional white values , especially the " condescending " values of white people of liberal opinion .
thomas chandler haliburton showed the same conservative social values in the brash , overstated character of sam slick , the yankee clockmaker .
the legalized use of one metal only , as gold , or silver , in the standard currency of a country , or as a standard of money values .
though it has generally low production values , well-known artists have contributed cover art .
in the twelve weeks of hell and transformation that were marine corps boot camp , i learned the values of achieving a successful life that have guided and sustained me on the course which , although sometimes checkered and detoured , i have followed ever since .
( _new york , 1894_ ) _net_ 2 0 =a treatise on the comparative commercial values of gas coals and cannels.= by d.a .
we saw in history the persistent emergence of a human type so fully aware of this reality as to subdue to its interests all the activities of life ; ever seeking to incarnate its abiding values in the world of time .
and he did look forward , too , to freedom from his family 's legal representative and the constant reminder of ethical and moral values which johnny preferred happily to ignore .
these values are too short to permit measurements of fluorescence polarization to be of value in the determination of the rotational relaxation times of proteins in solution , but can give useful information on local conditions about the tryptophan or tyrosine residues .
this is the kind of change which we have indicated to be necessary for reconciliation between the observed and calculated values .
it consists of 24 questions covering topics such as british values , history , traditions and everyday life .
general booth would almost break his heart if he knew the proportion of men who have been 'saved , ' in the sense that he most values , through his social scheme .
[ 196 ] the preceding practice is strictly in line with the `` medicinal '' and '' magical '' values attached in europe to human teeth , human skin , etc .
evaluators articulate and take into account the diversity of interests and values that may be related to the general and public welfare .
on the foundations of our greatly strengthened economy and our renewed confidence in democratic values , we can continue to move forward .
with what grace , intelligence , and appreciation of values would you move among the other monitors of great fortunes , admired by them , praised , and loved , i think .
the procedures would be called from a method inside the class , which would return an object containing the requested values .
his parents instilled into all the children a strong sense of discipline and the values of honesty and forthrightness .
_from the arabic of ebn kalakis abu el fath nasrallah ( eleventh century ) ._ values since there is excitement in suffering for a woman , let him burn on .
moral values are acquired through encouragement , instruction and interpersonal experience .
table j-5 summarizes the protection values of various packaging materials against vapors and liquids .
but his outlook was circumscribed , his desire to please abnormally large , and his sense of relative values slight .
blood studies resemble the clinical values of disseminated intravascular coagulation .
all values evaluate to either true or false .
the scale of values may well undergo a change with the decay of religion , but that is something which is taking place all the time , provided society is not in a state of absolute stagnation .
for example , suppose we have a scatterplot in which the points are the countries of the world , and the data values being plotted are the land area and population of each country .
by giving various values to _m_ , different pythagorean numbers may be found .
in their " annual report and accounts year ended 31 december 2011 " ba declares that " negative movements in pension asset values and financial returns from these assets may increase the size of the pension deficit " .
the p.m. may have taken these views at their face values : even , he _may_ have swallowed mr. murdoch 's picture of the conscientious altham `` wallowing '' in ice whilst wounded were expiring of heat within a few hundred yards ; but _mr .
grapes ' characters , the boy john , aunt agatha , granfar , and ole missus w , perform a literary operetta celebrating down-to-earth ordinariness over bourgeois affectation and pretence ; their values and enduring habits instantly familiar to norfolk people .
some evidence , based on synthesis of truncated versions of natural repeat proteins , and on the examination of phi values , suggests that the c-terminus forms the folding nucleation site .
we can determine a and b if the values of x and dx/dt are given for a definite value of t , say t = 0 .
physical exercises were given an emphasis before unknown , because of their hygienic and military values .
it would be so in truth if god 's omnipotence stood for a material magical control of events by the values they were to generate .
if we want , we can go back and find the values of the constants a , b , g , h in the equations now ( we also need to impose the normalisation condition ) .
he has specific research interests in social motivation and affect , beliefs and values , integrative psychotherapy , depression and suicide , the nature of mental disorders , and the relationship between psychiatry and professional psychology .
these relative contributions to the total lift are based on thrust values of 18,680lb , 18,680lb and 3,290lb respectively .
it indicates nothing definite about the quality of a gasoline and in many cases it does not even approximate relative values .
[ greek : _kritês_ ] , a judge , [ greek : _krinein_ ] , to decide , to give an authoritative opinion ) , the art of judging the qualities and values of an aesthetic object , whether in literature or the fine arts .
the following is an example ; the data are the values of tan x to five places of decimals , the interval in x being 1° .
arrays must be indexed by int values .
the following are average values of the coefficient of friction for water , obtained from experiments on large plane surfaces , moved in an indefinitely large mass of water .
for most models some data is well known , some has pretty good estimates ( within a small range of values ) , and other data can be widely different .
she has introduced values that are contrary to the biblical message .
add 32 to each of the values .
the attempt to determine an ideal price implies that there can and ought to be stability in relative values and stability in the measure of values -- which is absurd .
the aggressive fighting spirit which he carried into the discussion of definite men and measures did not blind him to the permanent values of the matters in dispute .
it may mean that their religious values teach them to hold life sacred .
in all the earth none values aught more than the worth of woman -- save one , black alberich alone , who has forsworn love , stolen the rhine gold and made from it a ring to give him the mastery of the world .
the absolute and relative intensive values for the two forms are given in the following table : table xxvi .
having submitted itself to the discipline of the sciences , it is acquainted with their methods and data in a manner which enables it to oppose the dogmatism of science , and to acclaim the reality of values other than those which are purely scientific .
in the old days , such a panic , with the accompanying extreme shrinkage of values , would have been a golden harvest time for him .
but that other man ’ s name , inquire as you please , you shall not hear ; for the highlander values a secret for itself and for the congenial exercise of keeping it .
much of the organizational and institutional base of pakistani-canadian community life is a reflection of the centrality of their religion , its laws , rituals , values , and way of life .
_aim._ -- to recognize sequences combining five values in each of ten hues .
table 36 gives the approximate percentages of these constituents for the general classes of coals with the corresponding heat values per pound of combustible .
the east anglian 'leet' in norfolk and suffolk we find domesday recording assessed values not , as everywhere else , at the outset of an entry , but at its close ; not in terms of hides and carucates , but in terms of shillings and pence .
some of the best land values now lie in the old east and south .
combining in a single stroke of the brush , vigor and an eclectic character of line , with values and fluidity of tone , he brought to a supreme unity the two great principles by which things are made manifest in all the magic of their essential structure .
typically used with sql statements such as queries or updates , the prepared statement takes the form of a template into which certain constant values are substituted during each execution .
the relation of the different tones in this way -- the values , as it is called -- is an extremely important matter in painting .
for english measures the following are the values of the coefficients : -- + -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- + -- -- -- -+ -- -- -- -+ -- -- -- + | kind of pipe .
having an existential view of nursing as a living dialogue influences which phenomena one becomes aware of , experiences , values , studies , and describes .
each operation card will require three other cards , two to represent the variables and constants and their numerical values upon which the previous operation card is to act , and one to indicate the variable on which the arithmetical result of this operation is to be placed .
for the first time the system of ecclesiastical values was confronted by something novel , which was not -- like the old teutonic ideal of the perfect warrior -- tainted by barbarism , but may be described as the system of mundane court values .
proportional to " in this case means that the denominator is not a function of x _ j and thus is the same for all values of x _ j ; it forms part of the normalization constant for the distribution over x _ j .
i just tried putting my prescription sunglasses over my prescription glasses ( essentially same values ) , and it was blurry as hell .
he tries to fit it into shape with the scale of values he acquired at his preparatory school .
unlike fengshui , huǒhēiàn values diagonal and non-orthogonal arrangements , closed spaces , corners , dim lighting , blocked pathways , and jade statuettes of snakes ( a trademark of the art ) .
he places all life 's values in the other world .
what different values of , indicate 60 specific gravity .
affinity4 partners with charities , ministries , and other nonprofit organizations that share the same traditional christian values .
viewed in a commercial sense , as an exchange of considerations or values , apprenticeship can be regarded like other engagements ; yet , what an apprentice gives as well as what he receives are alike too conditional and indefinite to be estimated by ordinary standards .
the control rules for estimating module values are based on logic relationships between inputs and outputs , expressed in linguistic terms by ' if-then ' statements .
as displays cannot output negative light ( negative light does not exist ) , these negative values will effectively be clipped and the resulting luma value will be too high .
all inner values can here be nothing more than an accessory and reminiscence of what reaches us from without .
the location and size of the parabola , and how it opens , depend on the values of , , and .
the curriculum emphasizes the study of bible , synagogue skills , jewish culture and values , religious life and laws , israel and hebrew language , with the goal of instilling a lifelong connection to judaism .
native culture , values , language and self-determination .
this form of encoding cannot represent some values in binary .
business logic framework also offers a type system that provides a consistent way to work with data types and still handle null values from databases .
during her speech at the " yekirat hanegev " award ceremony of the ben-gurion university of the negev berry dedicated the award to her parents " my inspiration , who bestowed me with the values of caring and public giving .
settlement had been hastened , transport facilities had been provided , values had increased , social intercourse had been ameliorated , national unity had been fostered , in ways impossible had private enterprise been left to struggle on unaided .
numeric values are stored internally as five-byte floating point numbers .
he values your threats and promises alike ; and neither the one nor the other will turn him one inch from his own course , to aid you in your dishonest purpose .
so at every point where we are planning for a better and more efficient organization , it seems necessary to hold on to the values created in the past and not to disturb the entire balance of society by too sudden changes .
if the darker values of the scale are used , the picture is said to be in low key .
_e._ the number of medical specimens that need to be collected varies with the type of analysis performed and the impact of the values determined .
the mission of wagggs is to enable girls and young women to develop their fullest potential as responsible citizens of the world , teach leadership , and instill values .
if the oxygen absorbed values are determined by the four-hour test at 27° c. they should be multiplied by two .
otherwise , the party wants a more open and available sami parliament , criticise the sami parliament for neglecting traditionally sami values and society and thus want to strengthen the rights for the rural and coastal population .
since 2006 , gentrification in the darebin area has seen average incomes and property values increase siginifcantly in the region , particularly in the suburbs of northcote , fairfield , alphington and thornbury .
thus there is growing up among those who are in the government schools in contact with the liberal thinking of the west a disposition to question the values of the present religious system .
it has been the opinion of many political leaders that efforts should be made to reach a common ground between diverse ethnic and religious groups based on the tolerance , understanding , and respect of the fundamental set of values and beliefs of each group .
in the first place , that would be equivalent to saying that providence doesn't know what is best for you ; and in the second , it spoils all one 's sense of values . ''
what are the chief values of meat ?
derived from mass values using molar mass of 65 .
even in the rise of birds and mammals we can discern that the evolutionary process was making towards a fuller embodiment or expression of what man values most -- control , freedom , understanding , and love .
religious , æsthetic , patriotic , moral values , all call for their share of this energy , and the amount given to each varies from time to time .
but if he is familiar with the values of the various combinations taken separately , he will have no difficulty in computing them when they are found together .
within a relatively short time ( 50-100 ) years , this forest will also comprise a substantial occurrence of old-growth forest with inestimable scientific , biological , and aesthetic values .
the theory that all values can be evaluated in terms of joules .
p. 279 they but most of them p. 372 `` bissaõ '' p. 381 `` the spot where there domicil is '' p. 387 the values in the table are inconsistent .
the situation thus presents us with another instance of the external adjustment of educational values , and focuses attention upon the philosophy of the connection of nature with human affairs .
the crime was used as an illustration in the 2005 edition of the textbook delinquency in society that an " intact two parent family " with strong religious values is not so important as having a " loving family " in preventing violence toward children .
a long poem often functions to tell a " tale of the tribe , " or a story that encompasses a whole culture 's values and history .
the meaning of the probabilities assigned to the potential values of a random variable is not part of probability theory itself but is instead related to philosophical arguments over the interpretation of probability .
he is the man who ignores , as unnecessary , any direct reference to , or connection with , ultimate or supernatural values .
the implementation of living values education is facilitated by the association for living values education international ( alive ) , a non-profit-making association of organizations around the world concerned with values education .
these include mitigating the effects of flood and drought , replenishing groundwater , helping filter sediment and nutrients and purify water , providing reservoirs of biodiversity and wetland resources , providing for cultural values , recreation and tourism , and climate change mitigation and adaptation .
that is , when a new pattern is used for training , the new values for the weights only depend on the old values and on the new pattern .
judging the relative values to the side of the two wicket-keepers is a more complex task than simply comparing their bye concession rates .
in all those who should become members , a change of heart , a turning towards god instead of away from him , and a complete readjustment of values were required .
among children , psychological dependence erodes school performance and can destroy ties to family , friendships , outside interests , values , and goals .
for all values of " questionable " .
intensive values can not take the place of temporal values in rhythm ; the time form is fundamental .
if it is not set then the sta has to use the default values .
argala helped militants like txomin iturbe and eustakio mendizabal build a theory based on marxist theories , but stressing basque national values .
but , although the intensity may range from 0 to n² , the smaller values are much more probable than the greater .
you ca n't have the slightest sense of values . ''
what 's at stake are n't democratic values or republican values , but american values .
feminist researchers should engage in self-reflexivity , recognizing their personal social positions , interests , and values , and discussing how these interact with their research .
one of the values of discussion is that it enables us more clearly to realize the meaning of the words with which we constantly operate .
by the end of the decade , minneapolis had increased property values , the city had its first increase in population since the 1940s , and there was reversal of a " 50-year economic slide .
once accumulation has been established for some time , when increasing amounts of value are thrown upon the market in every period of production , buyers for these additional values can not fail to become a problem .
no one of these parameters is susceptible of continuous variations , but at least one must be capable of taking a number of values which is not finite , if the group is not one of finite order .
in some environments , output values are fixed ( in gpus for example , there is a fixed set of output attributes , unless this is relaxed ) .
if the states have proved recreant to duty in this particular , the municipalities have shown an increasing conception of educational values .
how did he come so early in life , and in a nobleman's family , to set such store upon spiritual values ?
all these international barriers have changed their values . ''
there must be clarity of purpose , subject matter , nature , prior judicial interpretation , societal values , and related provisions .
assisting local governments and citizens in articulating , advocating and implementing the vision , needs and values of their regional community .
we appear in many cases to be applying 20th century western values to either historical or non-western cultures ( oliver cromwell being a fine example .
musk ming also explores a return to taoism values as a tolerant alternative and his work visualize the longing for an open-minded china .
a composition was planned for oral delivery and intended to please the ear ; tone values were accordingly of great importance .
there thus emerges with increasing clearness the prime importance of the distinction between erotic and egoistic-social impulses and activities , and with this distinction grows the unalterable conviction , from every aspect of human values , of the unquestionable superiority of the erotic sphere over the egoistic-social spheres .
the penetration of light into silicon is dependent on the wavelength of the light ; therefore , the red , green , and blue values can be independently calculated at each of 4 .
values of 1500 and below mean that it is used to indicate the size of the payload in octets , while values of 1536 and above indicate that it is used as an ethertype , to indicate which protocol is encapsulated in the payload of the frame .
all the above sections are of equal area , and the figures marked on each represent relative values for the perimeters , the circle for convenience being taken at 100 . ]
there can also be numeric values between the percent symbol and the letters , preceding the long modifiers if any , that specifies the number of characters to be scanned .
production , in its entire organization , aims at the creation of use-values and not of exchange values , and it is only when their supply exceeds the measure of consumption that use-values cease to be use-values , and become means of exchange , i. e. , commodities .
rapoport protested against commercialism in art , against the dominance of ideas of market over ideas of spirit , against the crushing of religious art by public indifference , against the loss of judeo-christian values .
the tph of today continues it 's tradition of high production values combined with the worse puns in the northern hemisphere .
conversely , when observation covers both the mental and the physical process , that is , in our own experience , we find that felt impulses , the conceived objects for which they make , and the values they determine are all correlated with animal instincts and external impressions .
the ideal which thus seeks to interpenetrate the most ordinary affairs of private life , stands out also in the market place , in the forum , in the halls of legislation , and setting aside the merely useful , exhorts men to return to permanent values .
measures of goodness of fit typically summarize the discrepancy between observed values and the values expected under the model in question .
he values the right after this , because he thinks there is none of it left upon earth .
be accurate with your modelling and values , and keep the planes simple and well defined .
an english painter , coming to france late in life , declared with natural anger that ‘ the values were all wrong. ’ had he got among the alps on a bright day he might have lost his reason .
as there would be no values not aesthetic , our pleasure could never be heightened by any other kind of interest .
these value steps may be thought of as a scale of gray or neutral values descending the _right boundary_ of the hue rectangle .
the members of this league , who work most enthusiastically instilling christian values in the lives of the youngsters of the parish , are an asset to the parish .
i found that her judgment as to values and fabrics was unerring .
so is the need for means of giving '' intangible '' values their right weight in the whole process .
as long as money is circulating freely business in general , being merely an exchange in values , wears a clean shirt and the latest cravat .
since writing is less natural than speaking and bears values specific to a culture , it has alienated individuality .
mr. davone ’ s portfolios of both low and high values was to provide him with the bulk of his opening merchandise .
quaker values to the wider world .
nevertheless , beauty of form can not be reduced to expression without denying the existence of immediate aesthetic values altogether , and reducing them all to suggestions of moral good .
the russian wiki mentions several other old values .
these values are respect , excellence , solidarity , creativity , civic rights and openness to the world .
[ note 2 : while variation of two parts in one thousand in the values obtained by an inexperienced analyst is not excessive , the idea must be carefully avoided that this is a standard for accurate work to be ! generally applied ! .
land values here were higher and , unlike the original line , the route did not follow an easy alignment under existing roads .
according to this law if the excess of temperature of the body above its surroundings is observed at equal intervals of time , the observed values will form a geometrical progression with a common ratio .
he would play the character of " tinker tom the toymaker " as a big brother type , as opposed to portraying him as a grandfatherly inculcator of values .
the quotes are only necessary for attribute values which contain whitespace .
`` he has a singularly keen premonition as to values , '' observed mr. rockernegie .
the baronial order of magna charta was formed in 1898 to promote the ancient principles and values felt to be displayed in magna carta .
in short i am getting to the time of life when one values one 's friends for what they are more than for what they do .
interest in the lake for vacation homes has created numerous homes along its shores with relatively high property values .
the commission will determine the amounts and values ( within certain defined limits ) of the contributions which germany is to make in kind year by year under the various annexes to the reparation chapter .
the format for a canned cycle consists of a series of parameter values specified by unique address .
in spite of the shade afforded the ground by the oak brush , temperatures reached the same maximum values as at the drainage site , owing to the orientation of the slope .
real debate concerns concepts such as whether to report transactions , such as asset acquisitions , at their cost or at their current market values .
two instructions that accelerate packed-integer multiply operations and produce integer values with scaling .
`` you have a sense of values -- you know what is worth having -- you have had hundreds of years to acquire the quality of looking ahead .
they discussed engineering schemes over their fishing-poles and game-bags , explored the fastnesses of the brake , eavesdropped for the ultimate secret of the woods , and plumbed for the bayou 's heart , bringing from them all sundry tangible witnesses of geologic or other conditions of scientific values .
henry frohman had , as was later developed in his son charles , a peculiar disregard of money values .
much study , many renderings only serve to bring out new values .
many scientists have written special purpose codes to compute these growth values and instability thresholds .
it follows that wagner 's dream of making the opera a sum of all the values of poetry , drama , and music , and so an art more beautiful than any one of them , is fallacious .
recent years have seen an enormous advance in values .
they used photometric methods to obtain new values for the luminosity of the cepheids .
net there exist tools that attach to the runtime engine and every time that an exception of interest occurs they record debugging information that existed in memory at the time the exception was thrown ( stack and heap values ) .
the index values of the resulting " multidimensional array " can be thought of as increasing in row-major order .
for more than 2 years , she has produced high-quality documentaries featuring the filipino people , their lifestyle and values .
for example , in graph algorithms , it is typical to assume that the vertices are numbered 1 through n and that each memory cell can hold any of these values , so that they can refer to any vertex .
nicholas followed his father roots and values , and after graduating with a bachelor of arts ( 1988 ) and a master of business administration ( 1990 ) from fordham university , took over the family business .
as such , the individual would have access to these cash values tax-free regardless of growth , provided it is set up properly .
a wide range of values will cause a lack of unity .
author simply added up 110 years worth of data and divided it by current population values .
both pressure and current vary continually above and below the virtual values in alternating current circuits .
every person who has any business to transact , and values punctuality , possesses a diary , which is drawn up in that form which appears most suitable to his peculiar business or profession .
the school promotes traditional values and encourages families ' close involvement in their children 's education and the life of the school ; pupils " have a love of learning and look after each other in a genuinely friendly , family atmosphere " .
[ 43 ] clavigero says , that a mexican load was equal in weight to fifty spanish pounds , or eight hundred ounces , and values the gold which motecusuma offered to cortes on this occasion at above three millions of ducats !
i may use any or all of the `` elements of vocal expression '' to give that proper relation of values to the words in a single phrase .
a bushel doesn't measure values .
until now i have n't appreciated the true values .
this would depend on the data type , and we discuss how values are stored shortly .
in this course you will learn about the software , rules , and cultural values that drive and support this ubiquitous and community-built online encyclopedia .
the ladies are indefatigable in their efforts against home rule , and one distinguished canvasser for signatures to the roman catholic petition has been warned by the police , as she values her life , to leave dublin for a time .
now we may begin a brute force search of the space of possible keys ( initial values ) for lfsr-3 ( assuming we know the tapped bits of lfsr-3 , an assumption which is in line with kerckhoffs ' principle ) .
a mock is specified by an individual test case to validate test-specific behavior , checking parameter values and call sequencing .
bob can reconstruct alice 's phone number by computing the values of a and b from the values ( f ( 4 ) and f ( 5 ) ) he has received .
other businesses began to flee the area and property values plummeted , though justice souter noted that the study conducted by the city " found no certain correlation between the location of those establishments and depressed property values " .
all he produced ( use values and children ) was taken by his master .
it was a logical climax to the turmoil into which english institutions and values had been cast by the long years of civil war that preceded the deed .
however , the result can be generalized to many situations where the functions naturally belong to a finite-dimensional parameter space , most notably to transcendental entire and meromorphic functions with a finite number of singular values .
nevertheless , its native state remains fairly intact at lower ph values , as determined using nmr .
these courses focus on subject matter which is primarily guided by the needs of social institutions and societal values .
similarly , reporting all of the points stored in the left-subtrees of the vertices with values less than x2 along the search path from vsplit to x2 , and report the leaf of this path if it lies within the query interval .
if values differ interculturally , the issue arises of the extent to which behaviour should be modified in the light of the values of specific cultures .
the geometricians have sought methods to obtain the general function of indices that satisfies this equation , so that for any particular case we need only to substitute in this function the corresponding values of the indices .
the two values are comparable , if we remember the attrition occurring between the years 1806 and 1816 .
we now know the relative values given the marks by the greek grammarians .
when working with large values of exponent , this offers a substantial speed benefit over both of the previous two algorithms .
they were called upon , as now , to dissipate their values in large classes of children , having time to see none clearly , and the powers above dealt them out the loaf that was to be cut .
the last three are double the size of the smaller values .
i think it would make an interesting comparison between the food value and the heat values involved .
and with an air of triumph the victorious girl bears away what at this moment she values a prize .
in other languages , variables are often initialized to known values when created .
from the standpoint of essential values , therefore , the felon finds it more and more puzzling to parse virtue .
there is no conception of the principle of vicarious suffering , and the values set upon righteousness and prosperity never attain to those words of jesus : '' blessed are they that have been persecuted for righteousness sake . ''
since the premise of this procedure is to determine the hypothetical properties of a liquid , the precision of the result depends on the precision to which the surface energy values of the probe liquids are known .
the real component values for negative permittivity and permeability results in real component values for negative refraction n .
haskalah , the jewish movement supporting the adoption of enlightenment values , advocated an expansion of jewish rights within european society .
not that it would have been any great loss if she had , for there is as much difference in the values of tempers as in those who lose them .
( _c_ ) how shall right-of-way and real estate values be ascertained ?
thus it tries to promote and strengthen democratic values , human rights and civil society in the region of the cdc .
truncate column values to 32 characters .
the single tax on land values was the proposal and platform of henry george , who ran for mayor in 1897 and 1886 .
the article argues that the values of successful practitioners of the " venusian arts " are informed by an intertwining of " hedonistic goals and diffused forms of innerworldly asceticism .
social conservatives may believe that the government has a role in encouraging or enforcing traditional values or behaviours .
it was even then a comical bit of political mathematics to establish anything like an equation between the two , nor could it possibly have been done with reference to intrinsic values .
the year the above three values are for .
note that unlike the s _ i , each w _ i may take negative values as well as positive values .
the net input is computed as an average , not a sum , over connections , based on normalized , sigmoidally transformed weight values , which are subject to scaling on a connection-group level to alter relative contributions .
the general name given to the commodities or articles which the people of different countries universally accept in exchange , as the equivalent for all other commodities or services , and as the measure of values , is money .
mean values of quantities .
for a given supported number of possible output values , reducing the average granular distortion may involve increasing the average overload distortion , and vice versa .
two of its core values are independence and impartiality .
free-choice could be introduced generally only by a substitution for brahman regulation of something quite other -- as the warrior castes , for instance , extorted for themselves from a submissive hierarchy a different scale of moral values .
`` not like you , '' he said -- '' not wild flowers that no one values , but choice , wonderful , aristocratic flowers that are picked out of catalogues and cost money and need attention from a gardener . ''
an estimation of relative values , or relative grades of perfection in things , is unintelligible except in reference to some such standard ; it involves of necessity the intuition of such a standard .
but he urges that the positive values of property are such that the present policy of placing no check upon property should be maintained .
when we meet them there is always a slight shock , a psychic tingling , a displacement of values , that makes us uncertain of our pathway ; the colors seen in this artificial light are different from those seen by day .
he can give you everything that the world values .
software tools are available to brewers to formulate and adapt recipes with a view to accurately measure the various values in brewing .
the time involved may vary from days for shallow gravel aquifers to millions of years for deep aquifers with very low values for hydraulic conductivity .
property may , therefore , claim social value in so far as it serves these ends , unless it interferes with other social values .
the specific values of art are technical values , more permanent and definite than the adventitious analogies on which a stray observer usually bases his views .
recalling that a generic spin state can be written as a superposition of states with definite m , we see that if s is an integer , the values of m are all integers , and this matrix corresponds to the identity operator .
socially , one may say of her , in that atrocious phrase which implies a queer jumble of values , that she is `` very much in demand . ''
throughout schlußakkord , music serves both to further the plot and to symbolise values .
the table below gives a brief description of possible quality scale values .
euler 's formula ; if they differ modulo n , then n is composite ; if they have the same residue modulo n for many different values of a , then n is " probably prime " .
salinity has increased in the river system with average values of 2 ppt in the 1970s to 1980s to 30 ppt since 2000 .
since prices and money values are complementary terms , one rising as the other falls , and _vice versa_ , a rise in the value of money means lower prices , on the average , in that country .
however , particularly in the late 1950s , the depiction of the monarch - now elizabeth ii - on australian definitives became confined to the base domestic letter rate and the preceding minor values .
the application of the calculus of probabilities to natural philosophy consists , then , in determining analytically the probability of the values of these functions and in choosing their indeterminant coefficients in such a manner that the law of this probability should be most rapidly descending .
johnny put his head in his hands and said , `` when one variable varies directly as another , two pairs of their corresponding values are in proportion . ''
the value is always an integer , with fractional values rounded to the nearest point .
whoever values the result of scholarly investigation will be interested in this volume .
i could see that each values makes the approximation more clear and shows the readers how they have tried to get the approximation of distance through parallax method .
on the other hand , this mysterious perception by her of things unseen and hitherto unguessed , of rays of delight in the spectrum of values to which his senses were unattuned , was for ditmar the supreme essence of her fascination .
but in variational calculus we essentially change all the values of a function proportional to an input change .
but v_m = c [ root ] ( mi ) , where c is a coefficient , the values of which have been already given in the table in § 98 .
accordingly , by the operation of supply and demand the values of things are made to conform in the long run to the cost of production .
they range from 4 to 21 days and aims to draw out specific lessons for students and highlight values that the schools wish to augment .
i shall urge every man present , as he values his home and life , to join the league , of whatever sect or party . ''
but to take this work lightly is to jest with values .
the fundamental motive of the writer , the activity--whether he knows it consciously or not , is to objectify his values , his views on what is important in life .
to wrestle with the factors of every-day life , to have a clear eye for the different values of these factors , and in general to respect the dignity of the common are indispensable to every real human life .
now , these absolute values are supra-temporal .
henderson has said she values music theatre over any other type of music .
rivka notices him writing and composing the song in his free time and senses that yussel yearns for a bigger stage for his voice , but her values keep her grounded to the home life they have built together .
a whole new set of values , in fact , takes possession of mind and senses .
using the values in the iron example above , the total energy of a neutral iron atom using this method is -2497 .
by `` mean departure '' is meant the arithmetic mean of the 24 hourly departures from the mean value for the lunar day ; the range is the difference between the algebraically greatest and least of the hourly values .
the early chaldaean ideographs have often several distinct values ; and when this is the case , one of the powers is almost always an arian name of the object represented .
the conflict between planning and freedom cannot but become more serious as the similarity of standards and values among those submitted to a unitary plan diminishes .
the original relation , however , is reëstablished in the case of the next higher multiple , the eight-beat group , the whole series of values , arranged on the basis of unity for the simple interval , being as follows : table lxiii .
in order to get mr. jones' points , i tried to work out the philosophy of the subject and see what values there are , what meanings in the methods which led to his success .
these are the sources of the values given by kroeber and waterman .
in this way , he found the limiting values of the eccentricity and inclination for the orbit of each of the principal planets of the system .
however , due to clinical limitations , inulin and sinistrin , although characterised by better handling features , are rarely used for this purpose and creatinine values are the standard for determining an approximate gfr .
a standard application of sure is to choose a parametric form for an estimator , and then optimize the values of the parameters to minimize the risk estimate .
such however is the force of education and habit that the masses of the people are slow to suspect any change in the standard by which they have been accustomed to gauge or measure all values .
this would leave $ 4,474,000,000 as the sum of values already established by previous investment .
truth values of statements about the world derive from the world itself .
no art , it would seem at first , is further away than his from all the florentine traditions , and yet in the decorative colour values , which give distinction to his finest works , he is the child of florence .
give these values for five points each .
the indifference is only comparative ; our public prefers good writing , as it prefers good elocution ; but it values energy , heartiness , and action more .
just an instance of with some of the values hardcoded .
he applied himself to some writing he had to do till cahews came with a slip of paper on which he had noted the weights , quantities , and values of the things she had brought , and with a polite bow he handed it to her .
he did n't have any more idea of news values than a rabbit .
thus a new scale of values is established ; nothing is worthy or unworthy of itself ; nothing is excluded , but also in nothing is the interest identified with the thing , but imparted .
but when he found the burro in sawtooth pass he saw a ledge which looked as if it might have values .
measured system output values correspond to observations of the first model state , plus disturbances .
if the approximated zeros are not precise enough , the obtained values can be used as initial guesses for newton 's method but using the full polynomial rather than the reduced polynomials .
in addition , if closures are supported as first-class values , it becomes necessary to represent these captured bindings by creating data structures .
“ we shepherds are the liveliest lads as ever trod english ground , if we drops into an ale-house we values not a crownd .
these are the spaces of l2 boundary values of holomorphic functions on the upper and lower halfplanes .
the values here used are mainly selling prices at the mines .
these ideal values and the integrity of the appearance of supremacy , are sustained by the assumption of the forms of empire or the imperialistic attitude .
note that we did not need to calculate squares for the values 9 through 16 , as they are all negatives of the previously squared values ( e .
the function [ pi ] ( f ) is also insensible for sensible values of f , but for insensible values of f it may become sensible and even very great .
at such a time this spirit feels indeed that worlds , he values , fall at one fierce blow .
today , such values can be easily found in various handbooks and study publications such as the crc handbook of mechanical engineering ( 2nd ed .
her agriculture and grazing interests already exceed the enormous values of her gold and silver , yet few farmers or cattle men make more than a living .
to implement a z-buffer , the values of z ' are linearly interpolated across screen space between the vertices of the current polygon , and these intermediate values are generally stored in the z-buffer in fixed point format .
taking the boundary values of both sides and their normal derivative yields 2 equations .
the prowler must have intuition and imagination and perseverance and historical perspective , but with these he must have something else -- that inner vision that finds values in everything human .
'you and herakleion , you are all of a piece. -- you sha n't drag me down. -- not if i am to live here. -- i know one loses one 's sense of values here .
to propagate western values in art education and the colonial agenda , the british established art schools in calcutta and madras in 1854 and in bombay in 1857 .
he was brought up with values that are based on understanding the need to give back and helping those in need .
one of the highest values of his philosophy he thought to be this , that it freed man from the fear of death , `` which is worse than death itself . ''
this type of comment is no longer acceptable there , because it assumes that the default commenter is male and heterosexual and somewhat predatory , and creates the atmosphere that anyone who does not buy into these values is less than welcome .
the values read from the threshold map should scale into the same range as is the minimal difference between distinct colors in the target palette .
she could be opposed to traditional notions of romance out of feminist or conservative values , but still be heterosexual .
what she wants is to bring up her daughters with cultural values .
the 1850 census contains the total value of imports and exports by state , statistics and names of the major imports and exports , the total values of shipping by state , and the value of imports and exports with various individual countries .
the values of the papers in the sub-parcels are as follows : -- g 1,000 h 500 l 300 -- -- - total value of unexhausted papers 1,800 value of exhausted papers 100 -- -- - total value 1,900 _reg .
the value of c is also affected by radiative losses , but for air , values of c of 1 .
hgte bonds are weak leading to low hardness values .
to test a proposed integral value of p ( cadmium red ) , we calculate p´ ( cadmium green ) from ( 17 ) , using the observed values of x , x´ .
variants of both algorithms with different output sizes will perform similarly , since the message expansion and compression functions are identical , and only the initial hash values and output sizes are different .
in truth , there are no ex ante expected values , only hypotheses , and one is left wondering about the roles of modeling and data decision .
the chart also provided general guidance to comfort and hazard through threshold values of the index , such as 1400 , which was the threshold for frostbite .
franc , a french coin current at different periods and of varying values .
the supply of each metal is independent of the other , and their values , therefore , can only be kept the same by a control and adjustment of the demand thereto .
the unrest began with a series of student occupation protests against capitalism , consumerism and traditional institutions , values and order .
the shifting of values was disturbing to him .
anderson invited internet pioneer tim berners-lee on stage to converse with snowden , who said that he would support berners-lee 's concept of an " internet magna carta " to " encode our values in the structure of the internet .
the two placing programs both used improperly defined macros while the winner , choosing to work with an uncommon text based format , zeroed out pixel values while keeping the number of digits intact .
the tin mines of the peninsula were made crown property , and tin and pewter coins were struck of the old values .
the equilibrium constant for this reaction can be specified either as a reaction with dissolved carbon dioxide or as a reaction with carbon dioxide gas ( see carbonic acid for values and details ) .
zar high card points ( zhp ) are the sum of the traditional milton work or charles goren 4-3-2-1 scale and control values for the ace and king .
the single features a song-writing credit , production values additional vocals by cee-lo green of gnarls barkley .
france calls on all parties to act with respect for the principles and values of democracy .
common values are listed below , you should consult your hardware specific documentation as well .
so far , of all the above values together , only about thirty specimens are known ... .
they believed in moral `` truths , '' in these they thought they had found the highest values ; what alternative had they left , save that of denying existence ever more emphatically the more they got to know about it ? ...
the program that promoted democratic values by disseminating factual information and ideas gained popularity fairly quickly among the bajina bašta citizens .
it ’ s only a different scale of values , dear .
while it provided a wonderful framework for describing interactions in terms of types of feedback within the system , it was rarely possible to put the quantitative values that systems theory requires for full use , as flannery himself admits .
its premise is that international human rights law and the principles of humanity - the values shared across faiths and cultures - together provide a legal framework and moral compass for global action for progress .
our philosophy is old-world style wines meeting old- fashioned values .
in the 1949 movie adaptation of on the town , the song " when you walk down main street with me " refers to small-town values and social life .
by reducing the range of values in a controlled manner , the correlations on long time scale are filtered out and only the correlations on short time scales are revealed .
it is important to note that prescribed values of u ( usually lying on the boundary ) would have their corresponding elements removed from i and d .
in a summary of this kind it is impossible to indicate all the dramatic values of the work .
the categorical distribution is the generalization of the bernoulli distribution for variables with any constant number of discrete values .
bar gold bears a small proportion to bar silver in quantity , and is in oblong pieces usually of ten taels in weight , and silver [ 32 ] in oval lumps called 'shoes ' of various sizes and values .
-- continuous function , a quantity that has no interruption in the continuity of its real values , as the variable changes between any specified limits .
these values are in a sense arbitrary , but they are justified in the fact that they are such as to cause ordinary adults to test at the `` average adult '' level .
a statement showing in detail the assets ( with the estimated values thereof ) and the liabilities of the association , as on the date of the application or within seven days of that date .
he values her friendship far more than he dares to tell her now .
would not every note have reminded you of the fact , that she values nothing in england but its copper pence .
a culture war ( or culture wars ) is a struggle between two or more sets of conflicting cultural values .
because of the importance of blood perfusion on thermal equilibria in the body , blood perfusion values were also pursued early in the history of the field .
the quantities and values of the imported hops that are again exported are almost insignificant .
modern cynicism has been defined as an attitude of distrust toward claimed ethical and social values and a rejection of the need to be socially involved .
also in 2003 , bbc world service and abc sent tony to singapore , vietnam and okinawa for a series about the effect of chinese and confucian values in the asian region .
15 the vertical curve describes the values of the spectrum as they grade from red through yellow , green , blue , and purple .
even if this values are not provided i can make myself a good estimation about the object that you like explain to me .
if the radii are estimated to each be off by 5 further reduction of the size of the accumulator array occurs , by about 256 million values .
i abstract , in discussing these values , from the complications that grow out of the friction in retail trade , and the existence of many customary prices , and prices fixed by other than economic values , in the case of teachers , or preachers .
white asserted that the court " values the convenience of the pregnant mother more than the continued existence and development of the life or potential life that she carries .
other reasons for the decline of muslims were he believed , that muslims abandoned islamic values and relied on superstitions , and also that they disregarded science and , by extension , were not being able to keep up with modern society .
louis , new york city , washington dc and chicago expressed an interest in hosting a fair to generate profits , boost real estate values , and promote their cities .
derived from molar values using molar mass of 65 .
monogamy has been replacing it as a more desirable scheme ; but to attribute moral values to it is propaganda .
i don 't know how to help you , but you should make yourself available to someone who is worth your time , your respect , and values you , unlike the man you fell for .
this advice , of course , applies to other values whenever the flowers are selling well above the cost of the bulbs .
but these were sporadic deviations from the show 's main theme of family , neighborhood and the balance between old world values and new world assimilation .
they were more concerned with wages than wage theories , and in the purchasing power of their wages than in a theory of values .
commitment to ' traditional or normative family values ' is measured by creating a combined index of the proportions divorced and cohabiting , whereby those traditions that score lowest are the most familial .
amin al mahdi introduced her to the cultural circles in cairo , where she carefully avoided succumbing to the attractions of the bohemian lifestyle and , indeed , throughout her life , stressed her pride in her humble origins and espousal of conservative values .
in her statement , yaqoob said " i remain committed to the principles and values that led me to help found respect .
this can be as little as a single point , as in the median ( of an odd number of values ) , or as many as all points , as in the mean .
table gives approximately the calorific values , and the proximate analysis of several representative coals from various sections of the country .
he coordinates an international project in more than 70 countries that studies the antecedents and consequences of individual differences in value priorities and the relations of cultural dimensions of values to societal characteristics and policies .
the timeout values of each server should be spread out within a reasonable interval .
_there_ they may be studied as mathematics are studied at cambridge , or as classics at eton -- simply for their own great and inherent values .
the value of the guaranty may be considered from two points of view -- first , in the event of a general decline in real-estate values , and , secondly , when a fall occurs in a particular piece of property or in a particular locality .
your idea of relative values ?
by combining the above two values , the 12 for the first unknown and imix for the second , we can now say that in counting forward 31,741 from the date 4 ahau 8 cumhu , the day reached will be 12 imix .
research suggests that ssi creates cognitive dissonance by compelling students to consider claims that may be at odds with their own beliefs and values .
the values of the variables may be taken in any field l containing k .
the average values are from $ 10.00 to $ 50.00 per ton and bodies are frequently encountered that run a great deal higher .
june 1959 and was the diagram below contains mean values of monthly average discharges calculated on the base of a 52-year-long period of observations at hydrological station " bolshoy porog " .
neither are equals signs in parameter values of the template or parser function demonstrated .
arithmetica infinitorum ( 1656 ) series that we now call the definite integral , and he calculated their values .
there is not a moment to lose , if the marquis values life or liberty ! ''
for philosophic theory has no aladdin 's lamp to summon into immediate existence the values which it intellectually constructs .
the values under the present system for 73 species of kansan birds run from -5 to +22 ; early modal dates and cessation to breeding give low values , late dates high values .
generally , vd values above 60 are of dubious value , except in combinations of extreme prescriptions , large lens sizes , a high wearer sensitivity to dispersion , and occupations that involve work with high contrast elements ( e .
such philosophies have permitted that basic attribute of the complex vision which we call conscience to usurp the place occupied , in the total rhythm , by imagination ; with the result of a complete falsifying of the essential values .
at sea he found another standard of values .
since the limits between which h can vary are in practical cases not very distant , it is easy to approximate to values sufficiently accurate .
but moral values are something different -- they are acquired by experience .
as a result , moving further away from the village of gymyl the carpet gradually lost its artistic values and underwent a number of distortions .
based on light δ13c values , the origin of the hydrate gas is biogenic .
they stress that their nationalism is based on shared civic values , and reject nationalism defined solely on english or french canadian culture .
according to mcdonough , " this is a debate about values .
simultaneously disillusioned with contemporary children 's literature , he and anvil artist frank hampson created a dummy comic based on christian values .
some writers have attempted unification by treating algebra as concerned with functions , and comte accordingly defined algebra as the calculus of functions , arithmetic being regarded as the calculus of values .
there is no mode in which capitalists can compensate themselves for a high cost of labor , through any action on values or prices .
tournament play is typically done with 100 points per side , with infantry units usually having values of fewer than 10 points each and vehicles range from less than 10 to 50 or more based on relative strengths .
if you are able to store calculated values of f in memory , and add some more fine-tuning , the complexity will only be quadratical ( that is , much faster ) .
the division assists in the preservation of north dakota historic properties at all levels , and also reviews and comments on federally assisted projects to ensure that historic values are considered in project planning and execution .
why did i not go on in the paths of worldly wisdom , with a cynical weighing of actual values ?
boolean and hierarchically-nested queries ; searching by language , year , and library-defined types ; sub-type limits based on audience , content , and format which utilize coded values in the marc record .
culture war " ( or " culture wars " ) in canada describes the polarization between the different values of canadians .
the large scaling factor is introduced in order that 2-photon absorption cross-sections of common dyes will have convenient values .
the cultural values of swfr are not present in any structures or sites of historic importance .
i am afraid that by having these papers available on campus , students will be unknowingly absorbing corporate values .
the table includes keys as well as values .
egalitarian communities are groups of people who have chosen to live together , with egalitarianism as one of their core values .
policies -- incontestable , non-forfeitable , definite cash surrender values .
the whole standard of moral values is subverted .
pius x , saying the church has betrayed the core values of catholicism , have rejected some of the decisions of the holy see that they see harmful to the faith .
urbanization , mass public education , the presence of numerous foreign workers , and access to new media all affected saudi values .
the main long-term result of the newburgh affair was a strong reaffirmation of the principle of civilian control of the military , and banishing any possibility of a coup as outside the realm of republican values .
when two commodities exchange against each other , their exchange values will depend entirely upon the relative intensity of the demand on each side for the other commodity .
the latter was almost certain to yield too low values because the moraga expedition was notoriously hostile to the natives and at nearly every village approached the inhabitants fled if they could possibly do so .
coalitions can be epiphenomenal : their value can be higher than the combined values of their constituents .
values of n were derived from longevity records for captive animals , and as these were all large values of similar duration ( 14-16 years ) , they had very little effect on r_ { max } .
the values of these imports in the successive years 1894 to 1900 were £21,371 , £19,991 , £5489 , £9848 , £11,293 , £16,068 and £26,837 .
these values are the bedrock of our strength .
alternatively , these values could arise due to fluorescence of a dye in the solution .
no increase of rates followed any of these movements ; and none would ever have been made , had not war come to change values , and rendered it necessary .
there is no way for any theory or `` explanation '' to predict these values .
you may be interested in oliguria , which contains other values relating to the question .
the production values were fairly typical of the period , with interviews , reenactments and scenic footage shot on film , all voiced over by nimoy .
along with these values certain relations of biology must be well understood if it is to be well taught .
the rapid increase in land values has made it correspondingly more difficult for the man of small means to acquire a foothold on the land .
these values can be found in thermodynamic books or in online tables .
to nurture youth , based on christian values , to lead and serve .
the result was the same as that to which a speculative increase in land values tends .
all other values are matters of prejudice , simplicity , and misunderstanding .
the school values sporting success as well as academic .
but she still values you as the preserver of her life , and sends you a letter to one of our most intimate friends in paris .
revaluation does not mean only an upward revision in the book values of the asset .
we can never hope to “ recover our balance ” by confounding values , a process of self-deception which misleads no one but ourselves .
paper values , the independent ( sunday 8 february 1998 ) - article on comic collecting , incl .
these newly-enriched people cause the rise of the usual crop of parasites , and it is the study of the parasites which forces on the mind hundreds of reflections concerning the values of different kinds of labour .
colonel daniel richards , a successful local merchant , advocated the building of a canal to benefit existing inland industries and drain the surrounding marshes for land reclamation that would raise property values .
over against the denial or evasion of moral values by the naturalist and the dullness to the sense of moral helplessness by the humanist , there stands the sense of moral difference , the sense of sin , of penitence and confession .
if it varies more than 10 points above or below these values , adjust it by drawing off some of the electrolyte with a hydrometer and adding water to lower the gravity , or 1.400 acid to raise the gravity .
during this performance , ablaye cissoko transmits with smoothness , grace and intelligence the values of a generous tradition and sings with sincerity the peace and the respect of the other .
offset binary representations encodes a range of values using fewer bits than would be needed when using a common unsigned or signed binary integer representations .
the values of μ are obtained from b. p. c. , those of the radial velocity ( _w_ ) from the card catalogue in lund already described .
prices were passionately discussed , values debated .
finally , there is himself , to whom in the watches of the night the dinner will present itself in its permanent values as an incident in human intercourse , which is so fascinating , so transitory , and so suggestive of topics of reflection .
can the contemplative values which this possesses , especially in its most comprehensive shape , be regarded as independent of our world-outlook ?
they have been termed `` going concern values , '' `` business values , '' `` good will values , '' `` franchise values , '' as well as `` non-physical '' and `` intangible '' values .
the market values of the metals , as is the case for all commodities , ultimately affect manufacturing costs .
evaluates and returns the minimum of a list of numeric values .
the term moduli space is sometimes used in physics to refer specifically to the moduli space of vacuum expectation values of a set of scalar fields , or to the moduli space of possible string backgrounds .
personally , my own pleasure in meeting a real friend , or in hearing from a friend , is the pleasure of feeling 'yes , you are there , just the same , ' -- it 's the tranquillity that one values .
the manner in which they fall decides the denomination of the throw , and the different values are shown in the diagram .
true to the spirit of the gospel , archbishop murphy nurtures the full development of the gifts that god has given to each student , fosters service as an outgrowth of faith , and values diversity .
they live in things they 've imagined from things they 've been told or read , live on intuition and second-hand ideas ; and they 've no means of testing their real values in a real world .
it originated as the beta chapter of a now-defunct fraternity with similar values , alpha lambda tau .
the calibration process replaces unreliable and missing sonic and density measurements with synthesized values from calibrated petrophysical and rock-physics models .
sumati satakam has been extremely popular for a long time with parents and teachers who try to teach the right conduct and social values to young children .
walras ' lawwalras ' law implies that the sum of the values of excess demands across all markets must equal zero , whether or not the economy is in a general equilibrium .
in its highest and purest form , religion controls man 's life , both as a whole and in all its essential details , through the central aim or spiritual ideal which it sets before him and the consequent standard of values with which it equips him .
since his death , le corbusier 's contribution has been hotly contested , as the architecture values and its accompanying aspects within modern architecture vary , both between different schools of thought and among practising architects .
sales records were vouchered by original orders , shipping receipts , and invoice copies , and purchases by the regular vouchers , but there was no voucher for transactions involving transfers of values from one account to another .
uttt cultivates universal values , sustainability , entrepreneurship , social accountability , community development , cultural activities and sports , all through the student fortifying institutional program ( pife ) .
the arab institute for human rights aims to promote a culture of civil , political , economic , social and cultural human rights , as enshrined in the universal declaration of human rights and international conventions , and to strengthen the values of democracy and citizenship .
however , in western australia , which currently only uses the grassland fdi , the values of 75 and 100 are being used as thresholds as of 2014 .
the visitor leaves the night court with a strange sense of having his social values overthrown .
county kindergarten to twelfth-grade school boards are funded by property taxes assessed on home values .
for multimodal distributions , this means that an em algorithm may converge to a local maximum of the observed data likelihood function , depending on starting values .
western values of women 's rights enabled islam and islamic clerics to be portrayed as misogynist and oppressive towards women .
q are the signed values of the charges ( not the modules of the charges .
in recent years , the principle of judicial independence has been described as one of the core values of the justice system .
the different values attached to each of these two factors may be said to determine the policy of the library in book-buying .
the influence of these values with ay-o can be seen in a series of early paintings over which he painted a large x because he thought they were not original enough .
hence its utilitarian or hedonistic side , and the pleasure and pain , which are , as it were , the practical echo of aesthetic values and disvalues , of the beautiful and of the ugly .
the school implements these values and the catholic religion into its core curriculum .
since mr. moffatt began to buy extensively it is estimated in art circles that values have gone up at least seventy-five per cent . ' ''
english alphabet are used to write ojibwe , but with ojibwe sound values ; ( 2 ) the system is phonemic in nature , in that each letter or letter combination indicates its basic sound value , and does not reflect all the phonetic detail that occurs .
alert readers will have noticed that we quietly resolved sign ambiguity using principal values .
being limited in quantity , and therefore incapable of contraction or inflation at the will of jobbers in stocks or politics , they will answer better for a measure of values .
conversely , json permits null values for keys , while property lists do not support explicit nulls .
lucchese concentrated on the core cosa nostra values of making money , keeping a low public profile , and avoiding criminal prosecution .
in the same way that a 2n-row truth table displays the evaluation of a propositional formula for all 2n possible values of its variables , n variables produces a 2n-square karnaugh map ( even though we cannot draw it in its full-dimensional realization ) .
mr. russell 's election address , which was in fact the manifesto of the suffragists , advocated free trade , the taxation of land values and other questions quite unconnected with their cause .
the book , like the song , is about the values of remaining a virgin until marriage .
a stipulated aim , which seized the public imagination , was to make the potomac a model of scenic and recreational values for the entire nation .
there is no way for any theory or '' explanation '' to predict these values .
the chief reason for this lies in the fact that the camera does not accept color values , and at the same time accentuates many defects which are ordinarily imperceptible to the eye .
the person who acts on the basis of such a scale of values is not primarily concerned with the outward expediency of his action in turning the evil-doer into new ways , although he is happy if his action does have incidental desirable results .
what 's the best proof that there are an infinite number of irrational numbers between any two rational values , a , b .
unlike some of his fellow entrepreneurial contemporaries , he was seen as honorable and industrious and apparently instilled those values in his offspring .
it is because in war sordidness and petty worries are eliminated ; because the one great and ever-present fear , the fear of death , reduces all other considerations to their proper values .
the `` declared values '' of british exports to spain embrace but a small proportion , perhaps , of these shipping charges , and are altogether irrespective of duties levied on arrival in spanish ports .
this again presupposes a just balance and constitution of values -- a mutual balance of all economic and social forces .
he could but call it a felicity and an importance incalculable , and but know that it connected itself with universal values .
modern computers and calculators use a variety of techniques to provide trigonometric function values on demand for arbitrary angles ( kantabutra , 1996 ) .
individuality and a self-expressed casual style , have always been , among two of the cultural values for skateboarders , as uniforms and jerseys are not typically worn .
said values increased .
[ 78 ] thus benedetto croce rightly argues that in order to _appreciate_ the artistic works of bygone and extinct nations , it is necessary to have a knowledge and understanding of their life and history -- in other words , of their values .
the interpretation of these values is somewhat meaningless without analysis of the clinical history and is often impossible without parallel measurement of renal function .
men of fixed convictions do not count when it comes to determining what is fundamental in values and lack of values .
the " k " values in this equation are for pressure drop calculations in pipe and associated fittings .
of experiments to test the relative values of different systems of tapping there have been many .
shri maharaj was very much concerned about the changing lifestyles and diluting principles and human values .
the work of _arithmetic_ will now consist in taking that formula for its starting point , and finding the number _x_ when the values of the numbers _a_ and _b_ are given . ]
often the way in which the films interpret these figures and their times reflects the social and cultural values of the period in which the film was made .
sectionalism refers to the different economies , social structure , customs and political values of the north and south .
high rates of interest and of freight swallowed up everything and seemed to accelerate the terrible shrinkage of values .
these placeholders are then replaced with the corresponding variable values prior to rendering the final transcluded output in context .
practical values of good manners .
now , both cpus execute foo ( d [ i ] ) , but since each cpu has different values of the limits , they operate on different parts of d simultaneously , thereby distributing the task among themselves .
`` = -- recognition of news values is put first in the tabulation of requirements for successful writing because without a '' nose for news '' -- without the ability to recognize a story when one sees it -- a reporter can not hope to succeed .
if it resulted in spending a whole recitation in a discussion of relative values , as it frequently would , it should be remembered that that is the most valuable kind of study .
but i presume that some of the old yellow stores produced were `` the real thing ; '' for my friend and the old jewess soon became immersed in an eager and , as it seemed to me interminable , discussion as to qualities , condition and values .
cried rose in the same tone , `` why then he values me little .
color is very prominent nowadays in all writing about art , though recently it has given place , in the fashion of the day , to `` values '' and the realistic representation of natural objects as the painter 's proper aim .
generalizations of the levi form exist when the manifold is not of hypersurface type , in which case the form no longer assumes values in a line bundle , but rather in a vector bundle .
neural networks can be used to predict the length of menstrual cycles as well as stock market values or other things .
there are isolated samples of g2a1a men with reported ancestry in georgia , turkey , bulgaria , western russia , libya , and england with similarities to those of a north ossetian cluster based on str marker values .
it appears to be impossible to fix wages -- just as impossible as to fix the values of all manufactured things , including works of art .
if there has been any inequality of attack , the values will be unequal in their turn , and different from what they were intended to be .
in his later discussions , nagel treats this view as an incomplete grasp of the fact that there are distinct classes of reasons and values .
they existed in the form of claims , and the values assigned to them were arbitrary .
defn : a silver coin of several countries of europe , and of different values .
though the ketterings and he spoke the same mother-tongue , words bore different values for him , and full communion was impossible .
if the algorithm reaches the same values of x _ 1 and x _ 4 again , the new constraint blocks the search .
the educational and economic values of industrial education are kept in view .
_chassériau._ cxlviii one is a colourist by values , by colour and light ; there are colourists who are luminarists as there are colourists pure and simple .
the business of a good education is to make the associations and the values correspond .
the actual maximum at coyote , with pumps at full normal speed , was 270 lb. , and , at luna , 278 lb. , indicating that the values of the coefficients taken were too high .
the nucleosome core particle consists of approximately 147 base pairs of dnain different crystals , values of 146 and 147 basepairs were observed wrapped in 1 .
the resulting percentages , or cross-over values , are used as measures of the distances between loci .
in its adopted home it has revolutionized land values because of the money value of the product .
because nearly equal values are being subtracted , the noise performance requirements for the magnetometers is more extreme .
even when the speed is fixed , an endless number of changes may be rung by altering the relative values of the remaining two factors ; and in successful practice these may be varied between fairly wide limits without detriment to the working or economy of the machine .
since 1 is the minimum number of the three values , we ignore the other two and set the sum of the pixel to its energy value which is 2 ( red ) plus 1 ( black ) .
a is a function with values at singletons of the indices .
to fix the point at which this can stop is not , indeed , very easy ; particularly , as the value of gold and silver , which are the measures of other values , do themselves vary .
the calculus of errors leads to the formulation of the `` law of error , '' which is an analytical expression of the most probably true value of a series of discordant values ( see probability ) .
he is constantly attempting to translate the existing moral values into terms of their true nature , not necessarily into immoralities , but into natural unmoralities .
the hexadecimal values of 0x000 and 0xfff are reserved .
the theory of such single valued meromorphic periodic functions is simpler than that of meromorphic functions of several variables in general , as it is sufficient to consider only finite values of the variables ; it is the natural extension of the theory of doubly periodic functions previously discussed .
she labeled don siegel 's dirty harry ( 1971 ) , starring clint eastwood , as a " right-wing fantasy [ that is ] a remarkably single-minded attack on liberal values " .
( _d_ ) no allowance was made for franchise values of any kind , except track rights in streets .
if the server clock had drifted and the administrator made a change to the system clock , the tokens can either be resynchronized one-by-one , or the stored drift values adjusted manually .
winning without fighting " published by random house publishing group in 2011 , is an autobiographical book , about his personal rediscovery of the values of life .
placing these numerical values into the side lengths of adjacent squares gives you the fibonacci spiral , which is found everywhere from ammonites to pinecones to the fractal-like interactions of tropical cyclones and just everything else found in nature .
these values are altered by the subject and extra articles taken into the chamber .
for this reason , it is always wise to know exactly the values of certain trips , and the careful man or woman will know when it is worth one dollar and when it is worth three .
the rotating happens at the center of the object and its effective dimensions will retain the original values of the object as if unrotated , so you may adjust the position and padding to avoid unwanted overlapping .
elektronika features a built in sequencer , which allows changes to control values to be recorded over time and played back .
plato may describe the objects which man rejoices over , he may guide them to good experiences , but each man in his inward life is a last judgment on all his values .
this fact is as closely dependent on the general conditions of realising objects as tactile values are on the psychology of sight .
nor are the notes which mr. w. de g. birch appends , in regard to monetary values , to his translation of alboquerque , more to be commended .
these prefigurative steps go " beyond the market and the state " and base production on the enhancement of use values , leading to the internationalization of resistance communities in an ' eco-socialist party ' or network of grassroots groups focused on non-violent , radical social transformation .
[ 59 ] the hysteresis of the soft annealed iron turned out to be sensibly the same for equal values of the induction at -186° as at 15° , the loss in ergs per c.cm .
the organization is dedicated to " fostering enlightened leadership , the appreciation of timeless ideas and values , and open-minded dialogue on contemporary issues " .
his practical philosophy takes from kant its independence of theoretical philosophy , the disinterested character of aesthetic judgment , the absoluteness of ethical values , the non-empirical origin of the moral concepts : `` the fundamental ethical relations are not drawn from experience . ''
similarly , in an age of immigration and retreating racism , it is no longer appropriate to build political consensus in the state primarily upon one culture 's values over another 's .
the remaining four values seem to be the only reliable ones .
tommy is a down-on-luck guy , who , although living in poverty , having no social life and having virtually no family , he has strong moral values and is a very intelligent person .
according to youssef , the valid possible alternatives for probability values are the real numbers , the complex numbers and the quaternions .
the distinction coincides with that sometimes made between intrinsic and instrumental values .
bermuda , the strong winds following winter-season cold fronts can result in wind chill values dramatically below actual air temperatures .
the plaintiffs wanted the defendants to use the traditional values of 10242 for megabyte and 10243 for gigabyte .
the speaker will not attempt a discussion of franchise values , as it is a subject which requires the most profound study .
however , the rebels were not really convicted because their views aligned with the liberalism of the united states , and thus caused some kind of offense to the tory values of the canadian colonies .
it is not more _justly_ conducted , for , in respect of the value of goods given for furs , it was justly conducted _then_ , but time and circumstances have tended more to equalize the relative values of articles of trade .
situations of this nature must be addressed with great care and sensitivity to the competing values involved .
the following table gives values of f so computed on the assumption that f_1 = 7½ tons per sq .
in a few days values had shrunk , and the people of the nation were comparatively out of debt , and were ready then for a resumption of specie payments , but the government was not .
=common sense and science.=—we live in a world of values .
under conditions of a comprehensive unification of the way of living , inflation of ethnic-cultural values and the so-called " internationalization " of many peoples , there is a real threat to small nations of losing their native language , their culture , and finally - of complete assimilation .
in the past several decades , ann arbor has grappled with the effects of sharply rising land values , gentrification , and urban sprawl stretching into outlying countryside .
scarcely less was the influence of that great revolution in man 's view of man , that genuine `` transvaluation of all values , '' set in motion by the publication of charles darwin 's `` the origin of species , '' in 1859 .
a beckmann thermometer is a device used to measure small differences of temperature , but not absolute temperature values .
[ illustration : table of food values .
in eating recovery , clinicians and therapists assist patients in identifying their core values .
[ 9 ] a comparison of values of the agricultural lands of virginia and pennsylvania , in 1850 , shows those of the latter , although of smaller acreage , to have a larger sale value an acre and a larger total value .
the champions of absolute values have to accommodate themselves to the law of competition .
by considering similarly the function [ f ] ( z ) - a where a is an arbitrary constant , we prove that each of these sums is equal to the sum of the values of z where the function takes the value a in the parallelogram .
arising from within the heralds of the gospel , and sharing the same values , the two new societies of apostolic life , however , have distinct natures .
the effect of distance is to make colors merge into one another , to lower the values , but not all equally .
luckily the facts are not without a parallel , and in well authenticated medical books ; else i should have scrupled ( as what man does _not_ scruple who values , above all things , the reputation for veracity ? )
the comparatively high values at tramutola and saponara , mallet imagined might be due to the oscillation of the hills on which these towns are built .
_freedom_ since you are less hooked by the expectations and values of others , and you have reduced the list of requirements that others must fulfill in order to be acceptable , you gain a great measure of personal freedom .
the set of values of the test statistic for which we fail to reject the null hypothesis .
all schools have not set great store on values , although all schools have set great store on drawing and colour .
below are band gap values for some selected materials .
as values and norms mean so much when a reality is granted them by the truest of the neo-kantians , they come to mean infinitely more when they are acknowledged as somehow constituting the foundation and the acme of all existence .
it is not our ideas or attitudes or values that are as important as the constant active ongoing process of thinking .
in the subsequent discussion of physical and intangible values , it is attempted to differentiate between such elements as should attach to the physical value , or capital remaining in the plant , and the purely intangible or franchise values .
the cav mu attempts to maintain the values of uniformed service ; those of integrity , legitimacy , honour and strength in their veteran 's duties to their community , and to keep alive the bonds formed during their military service .
are we to measure wealth by satisfactions realized , or by values created ?
unless and until one discovers through practical experience the need for a different viewpoint , for values outside the immediate object of interest , nothing should be imposed on the individual .
such skillful salesmanship used by an applicant for a position can be depended on to make the best possible impression of his desirability ; just as the practiced art of the professional salesman enables him to present the qualities and values of his goods in the most favorable light .
in these cases , the film will either offer a longer storyline than the usual television program 's format or will offer expanded production values .
the values are , in fact , in unison with all the criteria which serve to indicate the atomic weights of the elements .
he knows a great deal about english authors and their values , -- but says very little about his own studies .
as regards fiscal policy , it may be interesting to note that in florence taxes had been imposed alternately on capital or income from the thirteenth century onwards , both being taken at the lowest values , and rated at from one-half to three per cent .
he accepts unquestioningly the standards and values of his school .
chennai is ranked as a beta-level city in the global cities index ahead of hyderabad and kolkata chennai has also been named in the ' hottest ' cities to live in for 2015 by bbc among global cities with a mixture of both modern and traditional values .
bids exist to improve conditions in their districts so that businesses thrive , property values rise , and new businesses seek an address associated with the district .
what is on the boards ( and the buses ) is no less than " a whole culture busting loose , " a catharsis of values , an aesthetic revolution .
riemann zeta function for odd integer values ; see zeta constants for details .
during this period , mahatma gandhi and gujarat vidyapith became the nerve-centre of all literary activities , where new values emerged and more emphasis was given to gandhian values , indianisation and simplification .
the women at first find it difficult to judge of values and prices .
ritschl based his system on practical values in religion , and professor william james has proclaimed the same doctrine in a still wider application in his pragmatism .
i could not help but see the dramatic values which had been given to the situation by the presence of this young lady .
unlike 2-operand or 1-operand , this leaves all three values a , b , and c in registers available for further reuse .
the authorities tell that its wood , too , is brownish and valuable ; but we tree-lovers are not enthusiastic over mere timber values , because that means the killing of the trees .
the one man holds in his hand the power to overturn the money values of the earth ! ''
the general approach is to express what each pixel of the low-res images would be for a given high-res object , and choose the values that give the best fit to the input low-res images .
american values and ideals are something that the muslim population can connect to , agree with , and feel secure with .
yet both mas 's curriculum and also the scholars that mas requires its members to read openly flout these values .
houf , horace t. what religion is and does ; an introduction to the study of its problems and values .
trade statistics total import and export values ( exclusive of silver and gold ) period .
at the end of the data word , the modulus operator is applied and the two values are combined to form the fletcher checksum value .
our christianity as the chinese get it is far ahead of the best they have , in ideals , in human values , everything , even if they were more consistent in responding to its claims than christians are .
these values are approximate , because ( as mentioned above ) the planets do not have perfectly circular , coplanar orbits .
meanwhile , the augusta chronicle , a georgia newspaper , warned readers that " pelosi will be speaker and her far-left san francisco values -- gay marriage , cutting and running from iraq , coddling terrorists , raising taxes , amnesty for illegals -- will become the house agenda .
furthermore , we must admit the reality of natural criteria of ethical values , established far below mankind in the scale of life .
the organization wanted to maintain a level of respectability and identify with traditionally accepted symbols of peace and moral values .
we know that under normal conditions the beef production of america has not kept pace with the population , and that even without the influence of war values of beef , stock cattle values have shown a steady increase for the past ten years .
in time , however , he came to agree with his philosophical hero , david hume , who believed that ethical terms dealt with subjective values that cannot be verified in the same way as matters of fact .
this pathetic phenomenon is characteristic of religious minds that have outgrown their traditional faith without being able to restate the natural grounds and moral values of that somehow precious system in which they no longer believe .
cried bell ; for she had already learned , either from her maid or her mother , the mean pride which values things not for being really pretty or useful , but for being such as nobody else can procure .
in addition , with regard to the amplifier design on most boards creative did not strictly follow the datasheets ' recommendations on capacitor uf values , negatively affecting the amplified output 's sound quality .
when bod values are used as a real-time control parameter , 5 days ' incubation is too long .
socialist harmonious society proposes similar values as the nineteenth century 's concert of nations .
he had learned to look at facts and people squarely , to estimate values and character promptly , and then to decide upon his own action unhesitatingly .
c ) is its cohomology with complex coefficients and the left hand term , which is the e _ 2-page of the spectral sequence , is the cohomology with values in the sheaf of holomorphic differential forms .
it supports an environment in which tibetan community and family values can flourish .
mast 's website lists her legislative priorities as family values , taxes , health care , businesses and jobs , and gun control .
nor must the two several values be too far different one from the other , lest foreigners be tempted to counterfeit our coin .
when real estate values dropped , many loans went unpaid .
it meant that exchange members were `` enabled to pay owners of grain in the country any price they desired without regard to actual market values as regularly established on the floor of the exchange . ''
i shall ask how these values are to be maintained .
the modifications in the relative tone values of objects seen under different aspects of light and atmosphere are infinite and ever varying ; and this is quite a special study in itself .
the forest is an important biological research area with considerable scientific , educational , aesthetic and recreational values .
at both those epochs the observer 's attention was chiefly applied to the absolute values of the _maxima_ and _minima_ of intensity .
he values everything in proportion to its antiquity , and prefers a time-honored abuse to a modern blessing .
to ensure the vehicle is safe to drive , time values called the safe drive away time have been established .
when we speak of ethical or spiritual values we are thinking of something that will minister to the highest good of persons or of a society of persons .
the sign of this exploitation is a rapid increase in the market values of farm land , due to frequent sale and purchase .
for this technique to work , the two images must first be aligned so that corresponding points coincide , and their photometric values must be made compatible , either by careful calibration , or by post-processing ( using color mapping ) .
thus , ' sanctus januarius ' honors the miracular transformation of deadened life into liquid blood again , which is the leitmotif of the contents of the fourth book of the gay science that values becoming a ' yes-sayer ' to everything one is fated to .
the _higher_ man distinguishes himself from the _lower_ by his fearlessness and his readiness to challenge misfortune : it is a sign of _degeneration_ when eudemonistic values begin to prevail ( physiological fatigue and enfeeblement of will-power ) .
there is the individualistic attitude that values the protestant work ethic , and this attitude is associated with more negative attitudes toward outgroups .
we ain ’ t got our values of men ’ s work figured out right yet -- the value of the man that gives orders and of the man that takes ’ em .
the fact is , it is partly a matter of habit , partly a want of knowledge of the comparative values of “ tips ” at home and abroad .
and then , when we mention the word `` france , '' there arise all the memories of the imperishable cultural values which its people have given to us .
the formulation of standards , the placing of values , and the realization of truths and ideals follow as direct results of actively entering into the life-experience of others .
they do not ask those who disagree with them to leave the gop but rather to join with them to return to the real core republican values that call for smaller government and protecting personal freedom .
it will be seen that the values of the index n range from 1.72 for the smoothest and cleanest surface , to 2.00 for the roughest .
the matrix has two columns , one for the feature names and the other for the values .
withdrawing values will affect the long-term viability of the plan .
for example , while it supports cardinality constraints , it only permits cardinality values of 0 or 1 .
if the european commission had decided the interim values in the 3-year periods should have no direct influence on the reduction requirement at the end point of the period , then the formula would have been quite simple ( i .
in probability theory , eaton 's inequality is a bound on the largest values of a linear combination of bounded random variables .
it is a postmodern tale of love and sex in a fragmented world of questionable values .
does it add fields , does it remove fields , are there incompatible fields , are any field values converted , does it check for redirects or multiple infoboxes , etc .
these values are derived from field surveys and laboratory tests .
however , these values , which are calculated from sargent ’ s tables , are based on tests of only a few specimens of the wood , and fuller investigation might make revision necessary .
mixtec women often carry the burdens of a double shift between the workplace and the home , but nevertheless make every effort maintain their traditions and core values alive .
imaging blackness is the complex concept of expressing , recognizing , or assigning specific sets of ideas or values used in the depiction of african americans .
it may be questioned whether some of the present pedagogical interest in the matter of values of studies is not either excessive or else too narrow .
confidence intervals for all the predictive parameters involved can be calculated , giving the range of values within which the true value lies at a given confidence level ( e .
reason has , to be sure , no independent method of discovering values .
most of the treaties fixed the same rates , and stamps of those values would seem to have been required .
traditional values , culture , language , heritage and spirituality provide the foundation for this development .
state low values , 15 november 1965the stamps were designed by a .
the image has high encyclopedic and educational values and imo as fp image would make wikipedia readers to want to learn more about mirages .
`` what , '' says pater in his essay on wordsworth , `` are the peculiarities in things and persons which he values , the impression and sense of which he can convey to others , in an extraordinary way ? ''
colonel burrard says the original observations of the great peaks made between 1850 and 1860 were not sufficiently prolonged at any one station to enable us to rely with certainty on the values of the height then obtained .
originally , calculation of these values required manually measuring the waveform against the scales built into the screen of the instrument .
although the films from 20th century fox had big budgets , high production values and were set in the victorian era , universal studios updated the films to have holmes investigating the nazis , and produced them as b pictures with lower budgets .
but who is there among christians that understands , values , or inquires after this immense and hidden treasure ?
the historian , or let me say rather the antiquarian , for the historian may have the scientific temperament , values facts for their rarity .
we live in a culture of mixed values and garbled messages .
but for transmission , maximum amplitude is limited by the use of the various matrix values in the pal or ntsc encoder .
the location x must be seen with values a and b in that order .
furthermore , many respondents have a tendency to give the majority of the values a high score , resulting in a skewed responses to the upper end .
it is not necessary that antecedently given values should be the data of the valuation ; and where they are given data they are only terms in the determination of a not yet existing value .
more grants enabled munch to visit the islanders on tristan in 1964-1965 for additional research ; a visit that resulted in lectures , books , and articles contributing to our understanding of anarchy , and to our general knowledge of community and social values .
furthermore , the close-knit nature of the community reinforced the parents ' values when their offspring were away from home .
as for extension being the essence of matter , since matter existed and was a substance , it would always have been more than its essence : a sort of ether the parts of which might move and might have different and calculable dynamic values .
the comparison is made for different azimuth values of the reference data set , the bearing is obtained from the data for which the correlation coefficient is at a maximum .
( 3 ) through weathering of the rock surface in place , which may develop values either by dissolving out the valuable minerals and redepositing them in concentrated form , or by dissolving out the non-valuable minerals and leaving the valuable minerals concentrated in place .
nomograms for normal values of finger length as a ratio to other body measurements have been published .
a positive feature of the internet is that it has millions of different chat rooms and blogs that allow people to communicate with others who share their same interests and values .
paid editing is not consistent with the values espoused in this policy .
chou 's invariance theorem says that it does not matter which of the coordinates are selected for removal , as the same values of distance would be calculated as a final result .
the honors scale transposes gpa values to their respective letter grades by a factor of 1 .
he values his powers as a poet and orator solely as instruments which conduce to an efficient utterance of the will of iahvah .
stockholders acquire dividend payments on a regular basis and gain funds when share values rise on security exchanges .
from your observations do the teachers consciously strive to realize these values in the class ?
as a rule , the effect of attendance on such a patient does so much for character upbuilding , and for a proper realization of values in life , that trivial things fall into their right places .
intrinsically , its whole purpose and technique consists of transmutation of values into existences , in the incarnation the realization of values .
analysis of data data that are used to arrive at a systematic arrangement of the species of _ptychohyla_ are analyzed and discussed below for the values inherent in the analysis .
the secret of morgan 's success lay in his skill in estimating railway values , his unerring memory , and his extraordinary genius for detail .
see graph for common values .
human beings have always had some sense of values—some perception or cognition of values .
think what this must mean to the life values of the future .
: and its insufficiency -- the theory of values .
this film genre was proposed to help build traditional moral values , which were deemed important during the rapid transformation of the nation 's socioeconomic structure .
the limitation of land fit for agricultural purposes has a tendency in itself to increase the profits of land-holders , under the principle of monopoly , though its chief effect is on land values .
it depicts the enemy 's cultural values with evil characteristics , and the audience 's as angelic .
to some it has seemed an institution for the relief of poverty , to others the support of the `` haves '' against the `` have-nots , '' but to too few has it been the home of spiritual adventures , the maintainer of spiritual values .
you will perceive the distinction when you reflect that the land is nearly all out in the country , while the land values are nearly all in the cities and towns .
the attraction process of the model explains how employees find organizations attractive when they see congruence between characteristics of themselves and values of the organizations .
not only can the bgit be used to confirm experimental values but can also be used to confirm theoretical values .
his business is to depreciate spiritual values , and to persuade mortals that there is no real distinction between good and bad , or between high and low .
swnts are an important variety of carbon nanotube because most of their properties change significantly with the ( n , m ) values , and this dependence is non-monotonic ( see kataura plot ) .
it is easy when these values are expressed in lines or colors .
the plane area of the triangle represents the near infinite variations of priorities that could exist between the three competing values .
this being true , any attempt to substitute any other standard unsettles values , and opens avenues for reckless speculation .
the font of the displayed values has been changed .
the values of ( mass and molar ) concentration different in space triggers the phenomenon of diffusion .
lewis , who always managed to rise above the slimmest of budgets and the barest of production values .
the first dictates that no two electrons in an atom may have the same set of values of quantum numbers ( this is the pauli exclusion principle ) .
and ought i not to be willing to give her to one who values her at so great a price ? ''
the gravity meter , however , must be calibrated at stations where the absolute value of gravity has been determined by other means if absolute values are sought .
the cares that trouble other men for him have little weight ; he values glory at its worth , nor cringes to the great .
hundreds more struggle on without a sufficient knowledge of dramatic values and plot building , not knowing precisely what can and what can not be presented successfully in the silent drama .
during the 1922 rebellion , the karelians issued a set of 15 postage stamps , with values from 5 pennia to 25 markka , all using the same design of a bear surmounted by the inscription " karjala " .
“ i wish i felt as certain as you two , ” said lana , who was still poring over her tables of vitamins and caloric values .
old measures and life estimates are absurd to her quick senses , and none of the best of our modern values are put in their place .
all monetary values represent south korean won .
an example of how one subset borrows from another is use of documentary-style production values used in a dramatic movie in order to establish the appearance of factual storytelling rather than fiction .
this scene is constructed and composed with a fine sense of dramatic values , and its effect is so sure and strong that it puts before the imagination a vivid picture .
-- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- + -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- + | theoretical values .
based on social network analysis , ena creates network models of the connections a person or group of people makes among the frame elements ( skills , knowledge , values , identities , and epistemologies ) of a professional practice .
no such scale can be lastingly valid , because , for instance , almost all technic progress decreases the appreciation of values through industry , and every advance made by luxury raises the claims to refined quality etc .
despite redenomination , the rbz was forced to print banknotes of ever higher values to keep up with surging inflation , with ten zeros reappearing by the end of 2008 ( see below ) .
the reviewer for next generation made a favorable comparison to the 1985 hack and slash game gauntlet , remarking on blood omens unique design elements , and the high production values behind its " huge and extremely gory " game world .
as deputy editor of the international banking magazine euromoney in the late 1980s , he questioned the sustainability of japan 's super-high land and stock values .
salazar was a catholic traditionalist who believed in the necessity of control over the forces of economic modernisation in order to defend the religious and rural values of the country , which he perceived as being threatened .
installed in a formula car , rear wheel horsepower may differ from values below .
it is impossible to find any value for _k_ which will satisfy the equation , _f_ - _k r_ = 0 , for all the observed pairs of values of _f_ and _r_ .
length gain and head circumference values were similar between groups , suggesting that the breastfed babies were leaner .
are they not on a different scale of values ? ''
the necessity of extrapolating phi values in pure water from measurements made in solutions containing denaturants adds uncertainty to the reported values .
this conclusion harmonises ill with the importance which civilised man assigns to them in his scheme of values .
by the ordinance of 11th july 1548 a higher limit of values was permitted .
it is important to ensure that the right type of modulus is being calculated when dealing with times before the epoch , as different algorithms yield values with different values and signs , see modulo operation for details .
we owe a tremendous debt to rabbi schneerson and to all those who promote education that embraces moral and ethical values and emphasizes their importance .
claude njiké-bergeret is a mediator between european and african values .
unless it is that , in a strange environment one gets one 's values confused ... . have you had to do any `` society '' reporting yet ?
the figures represent in all cases arithmetic means derived from the 12 monthly values .
it is , therefore , a simple matter to use this most current of all commodities , with which all others are most frequently compared , as a measure of the relative values of all other exchangeable commodities .
the measurement of economic worth over time is the problem of equating past prices , costs , values and proportions of social production to current prices , costs , values and proportions of social production .
it is impossible not to suffer from it , - in one who values your words as much as i do . ''
in egypt , the egyptian scale is to be kept with the values , which were measured with all possible precision .
government intervention when individuals do not have the same talent , effort or historical background would violate traditional values of equality of opportunity .
as you mention , there will always be uncertainties in the values of the system parameters .
by inserting the values of these constants in ( 5 ) , we obtain the first and the fourth of the equations given in section xi .
under right conditions no kind of business or property is more valuable , and yet no basis of values is more intangible .
it values neither culture nor beauty , but only the power which belongs to wealth and the ostentation which is the symbol of it .
there is too much intercommunication : the moral values of murders , for instance , were once the main profit of the house , and we could not get enough to satisfy the various moral ends for which murder was justified .
a well on the next lease elevated values and taylor returned home in two weeks with twenty-thousand dollars , which subsequent deals quadrupled .
now note : the values from 1/2 cent to 50 cents inclusive , `` fit for use '' , were returned in quantities varying from 200 to 250 copies , with two exceptions ; the dollar values in quantities from 400 to 675 .
the second day of july was the first anniversary of the founding of a daring madrid weekly , the _vida nueva_ , to which , attracted by its literary values , as well as its political courage , i had subscribed .
he also belonged to various party commissions , which dealt with subjects like the party 's basic values , or the special problems of east germany .
the accreditation process is premised on the idea that the accjc and the colleges together shape the values and best practices of the educational community into the policies , requirements , and standards by which colleges are evaluated .
he values very highly indeed the very wonderful services rendered by mrs. wells .
in a people ’ s hymnody that was inevitable ; but there are others so fine that the line of essential values between the gospel and the standard hymn is difficult to trace .
it now has 23 practices and flexible values .
it is the western standard of values , the western way of looking at things , which is in question , and which i must now attempt to determine .
during sea trials , which were conducted with limited amounts of coal , ammunition and supplies on board , it was found that the indicated horsepower and top speed exceeded design values and a significant variation between the three ships existed .
talcott parsons , an american sociologist , asserted that stability and social order are regulated , in part , by universal values .
king has a chapter of the national honor society , recognizing students for strong values of scholarship , leadership , service , and character .
in electronics , overshoot refers to the transitory values of any parameter that exceeds its final ( steady state ) value during its transition from one value to another .
in even the little things of life , this gentleman calculated to a nicety dramatic values and effects .
this 8 -page publication is dedicated to rambynas regional park residents and introduces park visitors to the park values also how rambynas regional park authority operates in a variety of topical issues related to the park .
we ask the ministry of education , should they not want to eliminate the book from the program , to at least include works by afrodescendant authors that can show the values of our culture .
suppose first that in each circuit the inductance and capacity have such values as to produce oscillations of the same frequency .
the balancing process that is inherent in reconciling the protection of the fundamental rights and freedoms with tuvaluan values or culture was considered in teonea v pule o kaupule of nanumaga .
the highest tolerance to salt has been observed at low ph values , e .
do i , nurse , search out the values on which i want to base my nursing practice ?
the root of the evil is that a whole range of the higher values is inaccessible to the majority , because they know nothing of intellectual wealth .
as with gloves , rings of different values were given to relatives of different degrees of consanguinity , and to friends of different stations in life ; much tact had to be shown , else much offence might be taken .
the proposition that commodities , as exchange values , are to each other as different quantities of materialized universal labor-time , may now be worded to the effect that commodities , as exchange values , represent nothing but different quantities of _the same_ article , linen .
duty-plate. -- many modern stamps are printed from two plates , one being the same ( key-plate , which see ) for all the values , but the other differing for each denomination : this latter is the duty-plate .
inserting these values into the equation [ kcn ] / ( [ hcn ] × [ koh ] ) = k_ { hcn } / k_ { hoh } we have : ( 0.1 − ‹x› ) / ‹x›^2 = 7e−10 / 1.2e−14 .
the theory of basic human values , developed by shalom h .
since , in only a few cases , the two values are really identical , happy marriages must be the result of a marvellous luck or of a wonderful power of self-deception .
in such case the value of the regression coefficient β cannot be learned , although prediction of y values is still possible for new values of the regressors that lie in the same linearly dependent subspace .
the possible values of boolean are false and true .
the values of the μ ’ s are computed from the data [ 8 ] and equated to the corresponding integrals which of course involve the four constants .
different hydraulic parameter values can be specified at each finite difference node and hydraulic conductivity may be different in the x and y-directions .
he looked , i admit , the picture of sturdy virtue as he stood there challenging his late master to permit this test of old jervaise 's attitude , but the prize at stake was so inestimably precious to banks , that it must have altered all his values .
`` when we look at suburban farm land the tax values range from $ 17 to $ 2220 an acre .
for more complex intrinsic multistic lifestances , having more than two ends , then every object may have more than two end instrumental values .
sometimes , applying it will yield dramatically wrong values !
the history of philosophy is the story of a _secret and mad hatred_ of the prerequisities of life , of the feelings which make for the real values of life , and of all partisanship in favour of life .
prior to the 1999 chi-chi earthquake in nantou county , taiwan , little information was available for estimating ground motion that resulted from large ( greater than m7 ) thrust earthquakes , and whether the values seen in that event are commonplace remains unresolved .
what 's ethical for one person may be unethical for another , because each person has their own unique set of principles and values .
a knowledge of textile materials and values will always help in selecting either ready-made clothing or materials .
while to dwell in them and seek acquaintance with their wild life was , again , an initiation that no intelligent man could undergo without a certain shifting of personal values hitherto held for permanent and sacred .
sloterdijk concludes that , unlike the ancient greek version , cynicism no longer stands for values of the natural and ethical kind that bind people beyond their religious and economically useful convictions .
instead of deleting it , it should just have the accurate , undisputable values for the powerlevels up to and including the freeza saga .
exif-make-value ] ] , where the mediawiki message embeds a template that contains instructions to make certain values link to certain pages .
there is here a confusion of values , and for this we have to thank the influence of the churches .
in contrast , the bitmap index is designed for cases where the values of a variable repeat very frequently .
the values which may be generated in this way are called lagrange spectrum .
yea i know on a basic level what p values mean , but am not sure what exactly they mean in this case .
as exchange values of different magnitudes , they represent greater or smaller quantities of that simple , homogeneous , abstract , general labor , which forms the substance of exchange value .
here again was a singular contradiction , though i am better able now to appreciate its full meaning , with a greater experience in judging the values of physiognomy .
they rarely strike further than half of their body length , and almost never more than three-fourths , but that it is still not wise to trust such values if only because it is not possible to accurately judge the length of a coiled snake .
ev ) ; positive values correspond to more exposure and brighter images .
fourier transform of the values of f at x .
this is a fork of trailer ( book ) which uses the adjective " cinematic " to make it seem like book trailers with higher production values are a whole new category .
he tried to escape insolvency by coining copper at silver values -- the first instance of token money in india -- then fell upon his people tooth and nail because the public credit was not stable enough to stand the strain .
the whole world is awakening to a new standard of values , for we have at length discovered the impossibility of running civilisation on purely materialistic lines .
is there any way of calculating their values , inverse functions , derivatives , critical points ( maxima and minima , inflection points , etc .
this gives rise to the distinction of higher and lower calorific values for such substances , the latter being those generally used in practice .
district , where paying mines were operating on six per cent zinc , ours was a carbonate ore , running to high values .
8vo. , half morocco , $ 6.00 =johnson.=—=the coal trade of british america= : with researches on the characters and practical values of american and foreign coals .
table of contents part i food values and food requirements the composition of food materials .
in announcing the sanctions , emmert said that he intended the penn state case to be " the cautionary tale of athletics overwhelming core values of the institution and losing sight of why we are really participating in these activities can occur .
many residents in the central coast support the removal of cheney from office , and i am proud to represent their values in congress , " farr said in a brief statement .
otherwise , it is a typical situation that the same descriptor is used to represent feature values of low certainty and feature values close to zero , with a resulting ambiguity in the interpretation of this descriptor .
for the 1990s the government intends to encourage private economic activity and to foster the gradual process of turning saudi arabia into a modern industrial state that retains traditional islamic values .
given the values that the establishment clause was meant to serve , however , i believe that government can , in a discrete category of cases , acknowledge or refer to the divine without offending the constitution .
the successive values , a/1 , ( ab + 1 ) /b , ... , obtained by taking account of the successive quotients , are called _convergents_ , i.e .
[ 635 ] the price given for spanish skins is probably an error ; possibly the values of the 'right ' and 'counterfeit ' are reversed .
the islands have high natural values , notably breeding populations of seabirds , marine turtles and coral cay vegetation .
lower pen values give harder wearing .
its key objective is to develop within each of them a true sense of christian values using a holistic approach that fosters the integration of each person as an individual within a global community .
moreover , most of us will lead our lives without ever really being aware of these values , let alone questioning them .
moreover , residue contact number ( cn ) can also be accurately predicted by hsepred webserver using the summation of the predicted hse-up and hse-down values , which has further enlarged the application of this new solvent exposure measure .
if x is not prime then one of the values returned by the modulo operation will be 0 and consequently the minimal value of the list .
with the publication of compendium of materia medica , not only did it improve the classification of how traditional medicine was compiled and formatted , but it was also an important medium in improving the credibility and scientific values of biology classification of both plants and animals .
i have just been plugging the values in as are ( which is probably the problem ) .
we have said before , that if chase made sacrifices of tangible and material present values for abstract principles , in his early days , it was not because , as is sometimes the case , he was a man merely of ideas , and destitute of practical faculties .
if , therefore , we wish to understand language in its true inwardness we must disabuse our minds of preferred `` values '' [ 94 ] and accustom ourselves to look upon english and hottentot with the same cool , yet interested , detachment .
with reduced values of that reproductive function it is modesty's province to defend , the attribute of modesty declines .
in short , the successive values of _k_ , as determined ( at successive epochs ) for one dimension , are a measure of the _variability_ of the others .
safi advocates reform of islamic thought , culture , and law by appealing to the universal islamic values .
a gini coefficient of zero expresses perfect equality , where all values are the same ( for example , where everyone has the same income ) .
paradis said that his exclusion marked a shift in the liberal party from the values of robert bourassa and claude ryan to a more right-wing approach .
note that there is no testing to ensure that the values entered are valid ; a value of " yess " or " statr " will appear verbatim , so check before saving .
) , two or more equations in which the values of the unknown quantities entering them are the same at the same time in both or in all .
a growing concern in the 1920s was the preservation of jewish values as immigration slowed and a native jewish population of eastern european ancestry came to maturity .
`` 'thank you , sir , ' i wrote , 'but i am no charity bird ; i want to sell goods only to those who appreciate my values .
the biggest difference from cassino is the values of the cards .
the book-tasters , wise as they think themselves , are very far from being unerring in their estimates of brain values , and better things than they have approved may have gone into the basket .
and , though we can all manage to enjoy for a couple of hours the fine sensationalism of _the beggar girl 's wedding_ , we should hardly accept its values as a philosophical background for our daily life .
the more civilized a people are , the less do they completely destroy values by use ; and the more do they use their old linen , etc .
sir william thomson found by exact methods of measuring that the increase of the potential with elevation is very important , and values about 100 volts per meter .
it is highly influenced by the notion and values of open source in the sense that it should be developed collaboratively .
to complete this series face values , a second of six stamps was issued on 10 june 1953 picturing human constructions of the island , from the warder 's tower on the three pence and a half to the blooding bridge on the five shillings .
each council operates independently , defining the " humanities " in relationship to the disciplines , subjects , and values valued in the regions they serve .
statistically , double values occur more rarely , and hence they are deemed harder to roll .
from these values , you can construct an n-degree polynomial whose roots are the x _ i .
while in truth the value of the product is broken down into the values of its component fragments _c_ , _v_ and _s_ , the capitalist mind conceives of it as the summation of _c_ , _v_ and _s_ .
a lady should take a pull at her horse when going over ploughed land or down-hill in order to keep him well collected , and should always ride slowly over ground that is deep and holding , if she values her hunter's soundness .
trustee pamela gough said it was clear that " this partnership is not aligned with tdsb and community values , and its continuation is not appropriate .
water protons in different tissues have different t1 values , which is one of the main sources of contrast in images .
for commercial operation , q values much higher than this are needed .
vii , a gazetteer provides longitude and latitude values for the world known to the ancient romans ( the " ecumene " ) .
in that case , a new plane of life is not attained ; a social utilitarianism develops , which destroys all inner values , and the sole _aim_ of life is to provide the _means_ of life .
the iic number is derived from sound attenuation values tested at sixteen standard frequencies from 100 to 3150 hz .
189 -- strength values for structural timbers .
webb identified 18 different ways in how god dealt with his people moving against the current of popular cultural values .
a spendthrift who values his honour at more than two thousand florins .
but without going into formulæ ; of this complexity , a couple of homely comparisons will suffice to show what a much larger thing a given income was in the early sixteenth century , than its corresponding amount in values is to-day .
beyond a general rise in land values , oakland had not acknowledged his irruption on the financial scene .
the enamels which are to be obtained vary in substance , the beauty of their workmanship , and in their rarity and curio values .
but desire has also a positive or active aspect , and in this aspect it remains in all values .
reducing these values to the ordinary equivalents , the dose , after which the cat recovered with difficulty , is equal to about ·048 mgrm .
for the first time he had discovered in his daughter 's character a resemblance to max , and much as he was beginning to love certain mental values which his son possessed , it rather frightened him to see them cropping up in his daughter .
dofa advised the australian heritage commission that there was no feasible and prudent alternative to partial demolition of cameron offices but that part of the building would be retained to allow the heritage values of the place to be interpreted .
logical disjunction is an operation on two logical values , typically the values of two propositions , that has a value of false if and only if both of its operands are false .
patterns of consumption also affect media values in the arab world .
the buffs duration can be extended , but the boost values are static .
all possible values of a variable are numbers .
10 the values to be given to s are : nature of soil .
the 73 largest taxpayers give in their farm holdings at values ranging from $ 6 to $ 20 an acre .
sbps are assigned to character stat values called spir parameters , which strengthen different character stats .
however , some criticisms to this theory are that it disregards how shared values and the way in which people rely on each other help to unify the society .
overall , there are many issues to consider taking into account in the debate of ethical values clashing with modern science .
he understood the necessity for preserving those values , while introducing the western political ideas deemed most proper for adapting the chinese political system to its new place in the modern world .
the article describes conservatism as a philosophy that values tradition .
well , i am not religious in any way , but i have a pagan ideology and pagan values .
it was a truer sense of values that made christendom and islam boldly place their foundation at time ’ s central point , up to which or back to which all the ages lead .
the basic hull design of the hamburg is a conventional , robust steel construction , with entirely flat decks amidship that slope slightly upwards towards the bow in a compromise between modern construction techniques and traditional design values .
according to seal ( personal communication ) , all blood values for wolves no .
the reason being productivity can be rolled up from raw data to project team level just by rolling up the values , instead of recalculating from the raw data , at each level .
but aside from these essential health values , i found that sunsweet prunes and apricots offer wonderful possibilities -- varying from the most delicate soufflé to the more substantial cobbler , pie or pudding .
mary 's pence roots its mission and work in the values of both catholic social teaching and feminist values .
and if at the end of the fifth year his securities had shrunken seriously in value , it was natural to wait another year for values to become normal .
virgil not only implies , he often clearly states , the original epic values of life , the homeric values ; as in the famous : stat sua cuique dies ; breve et inreparabile tempus omnibus est vitae : sed famam extendere factis , hoc virtutis opus .
we can see the erosion of traditional values and this community faces relatively new challenges , such as unemployment and various land issues .
the kickstarter page was updated with the promise that additional funds would go to increased production values for the game and film , and deployment on additional platforms .
except where the percentage of crossing-over is very small these values are expressed to the nearest unit , since the experimental error might make a closer calculation misleading .
three different strengths of stimulus whose relative values were 1 , 2 and 4 , were employed in the series 1 , 2 and 3 .
the center also promotes , elaborates and executes campaigns to conserve the values of the culture cucuteña and the image of the city .
measure of values !
isaac ott , in his textbook on physiology , says on this point , `` burton-opitz has shown that hunger reduces viscosity , and meat diet raises it to a great height , whilst carbohydrates and fat diet give average values to it . ''
in 1880 henry george had published _progress and poverty_ in which he had contended that the entire burden of taxation should be laid upon land values , in order to overcome the advantage which the ownership of land gave to monopoly .
all social judgments presuppose a system of recognized values .
the median is obtained by arranging the values in linear series from the smallest to the greatest and taking the middle one .
they are rather reflections of the positive values of the products .
in the autumn of 2008 , the worldwide economic situation began to deteriorate dramatically , most clearly evidenced by dramatic falls in the values of shares worldwide .
children of this age are acquiring a sense of social values , -- a consciousness of _others_ as sharply distinguished from themselves .
in pre-menopausal women , the test is less reliable as values are often elevated due to a number of non-cancerous causes , and a value above 35 is not necessarily a cause for concern .
in criminology , subcultural theory emerged from the work of the chicago school on gangs and developed through the symbolic interactionism school into a set of theories arguing that certain groups or subcultures in society have values and attitudes that are conducive to crime and violence .
here , hex1 , hex2 , hex3 , and hex4 are hexadecimal color values .
p. 75 ) , the evaporative values of 1 lb .
explain the statement that “ high general profits can not , any more than high general wages , be a cause of high values ... .
nonetheless , some companies such as conagra foods have computed values for their frozen meals , healthy choice brand , without weight watchers ' consent .
but he who values rational intelligence as a universal thing , and as a social force , will care nothing for these other objects of admiration .
the one we refer to was suitable , becoming , individual , and reflected personality in a way to indicate an extraordinary sensitiveness to values , that subtle instinct which makes the artist .
the stable distances came in discrete values , given by the formula ( give the formula ) .
the beats adopted the term hip , and early hippies inherited the language and countercultural values of the beat generation and mimicked some of the then current values of the british mod scene .
it focuses on the nurturance of values and character .
if it has come to such a pitch that nobody any longer values the cossack 's honour , that every one allows his gray mustachios to be spit upon , and bears the insult of shameful words , i , for one , will not bear it !
the normal values are , for men 21.26 % , for women 19.8 % .
too often fashion leads folly , and so fictitious values are created , and as demand increases so , too , do the sources of supply , but unhappily they are frequently not legitimate .
the system has been marketed commercially as nuval , and some consumer foods in the united states are marked with onqi values as " nuval " .
feminism degrades them to the status of industrial mechanisms , whereof the commercial products are the chiefest values , and children no more than bye-products .
law is only a part of the system of social control , and economic values , while influenced by legal values , are far from being explained when legal factors only are taken into account .
an appendix to the abolition of man lists a number of basic values that lewis saw as parts of the tao , supported by quotations from different cultures .
in manipur , surrounded by mountains and geographically isolated at the meeting point of the orient and mainland india , the form developed its own specific aesthetics , values , conventions and ethics .
for example , when measuring the electric and magnetic fields produced by an accelerating charge , the values of the fields will depend on the coordinate system used , but the fields are regarded as having an independent existence , this independence represented by the electromagnetic tensor .
many stamp papers say that only the one , two , and three cent values of the new postage-stamps have been issued and printed , but the ten has also been sent out .
dairying , which forms one emphasis of this monograph , was widespread in the area , and though each district had its distinctive elements , the underlying social values and farming methods were consistent throughout the county .
it is confined to the merchants and manufacturers of a competitive régime , whose daily life consists in the manipulation of exchange values .
they would recognize the strategic values of the district ; they would deliberately sacrifice its political and sentimental value .
strange to say , the subsequent operations of the mine have never revealed the walled-up values ; instead , there has been developed a queer lot of litigation , the tendency of which suggests strange uses of that extra million .
these distances were the values given on the survey map which were given to us .
they understand and appreciate their own cultures and personal histories , and are open to the perspectives , values , and traditions of other individuals and communities .
it follows that the exchange values of manufactured articles , compared with the products of agriculture and of mines , have , as population and industry advance , a certain and decided tendency to fall .
house of saud is not only hypocritical of american values , but also forms an unstable foundation for the safety of the u .
the differences of the successive values of u are called its _first differences_ ; these form a new series , the first differences of which are the _second differences_ of u ; and so on .
she is one rather to make than to prevent a scandal , and she values none of those bribes -- money , honours , or employment -- with which the situation might be gilded .
often it is the combination of the best science combined with the stakeholder values , estimates and opinions that drive the process .
he saw , too , being a man with a sense of character values and their use in violent contrast , that to the rhapsodic and poetic eugene marchbanks , morell would prove a splendid foil .
it seemed curiously improper that it should be so -- that the sense of values was somehow lost .
the mean values of the secular changes derived from these stations are as follows : -- i h from table i .
`` but so much for numerical values .
and measured by these values julien ranks high as an ethical saint .
but you do n't know the principle on which mr. sinclair values these shawls when they are invoiced ? -he just judges of them in the same manner as he did at first when taking them in over the counter .
to consider legislation that provides a cap on the growth in the appraisal values of homesteads for property tax purposes .
for example , terrestrial frugivores have [ .h ] _ { b } 's that are very near predicted values , whereas arboreal frugivores have rates that are much lower than predicted ( mcnab , 1986a ) .
wise tourists looking for values usually spend a day surveying the shops and their merchandise before they are ready to spend a cent .
so now , when the new mr. smith considered adopting her boy , this simple soul weighed values for johnny : mr. smith -- or johnny 's grandfather ?
new south wales has eight , and victoria nine values .
the measurement of values on a purely pecuniary basis tends to release a large sphere of activity from any moral restraints .
typical n values with s in parenthesis are -4 .
this probability is very different for different values of the nucleus charge ( different elements ) , so the d-block elements in periods 4 , 5 , and 6 may not fill out their outer shells in the same order .
special half-pint glasses have been issued each year , and limited edition pint glasses for the 10th and 21st exhibitions ; these are very collectable and some reach high values .
the values φ ( x ) may be approximated very accurately by a variety of methods , such as numerical integration , taylor series , asymptotic series and continued fractions .
we discovered that these exercises proved to be complexly difficult for the children who had not practised sufficiently in the interpretation of the different note values .
rms values , so both estimations are about right ( read ac power ) .
for example , an oversimplified model might give higher posterior probabilities or simple evolutionary model are associated to less uncertainty than that from bootstrap values .
it also states that " human dignity , civic rights and freedoms , the unhindered development of human personality , justice , and political pluralism are supreme and guaranteed values " .
plugging in the values , i get a figure of somewhere in the region of 3 .
we urge all sides to put aside their differences , and adhere to the values of democracy and the rule of law .
for the lower courses of these rivers , mainly in yokuts territory , three values were derived , 2,633 from general estimates , 2,600 from ryer 's vaccinations , and 3,430 from village lists .
the estimate of food values in terms of calories may not completely express the value of that food to a particular individual .
at the 2011 asturian best sportspersons awards organized by the asturian sports press association , suárez won an award related to human values .
the relative values given are approximate and depend on the game situation .
the monastery is known for its iconostasis , icons and manuscripts which express the wealthy and artistic values .
softly lighted , the whole colour of the place , with its vague values , was in cool fusion—an effect that made the visitor stand for a little agaze .
those not familiar with color science might like to note that there are 24 million hex color values , so a project to catalog them all exceeds the scope of wikipedia .
it is appropriate for wikipedia to take a stance on issues that directly threaten our project and our values .
lowering both resistor values draws more current from the power supply and lowers the input resistance of the amplifier as seen from the base .
leave a blank line after the end of the timeline , then add a line with the selected values from the list , separated by a space .
the figures given in the tables should be taken as indications rather than fixed values , and as applicable to a large number collectively and not to individual pieces .
the whole scheme of values is changed , and that which appeared to the arrogant intellect as wild and ludicrous is perceived by the poet full of strange beauty and significance .
alternatively , you can provide a second , optional end _ year parameter , and the value will be inflated for the period between the two years , providing a convenient way of getting values from different time periods adjusted around the same date .
jupiter was measured on eleven nights in the months of june and july 1794 ; from these measures schur derives the values 35´´.39 and 37´´.94 for the polar and equatorial diameter respectively , at mean distance , corresponding with a compression 1/14.44 .
harry was not , as a rule , susceptible to new impressions , but there was a subtle influence in the simple life on the prairies which altered one 's point of view and led to one 's forming a new estimate of values .
the long war had prostrated the people ; the land had been overrun with armies , farms despoiled , trade ruined , cities turned into barracks , money values utterly dissipated .
the group has been fortunate to have had , over the years , an energetic leadership team ; men and women committed to the inculcation of social and moral values in the boys and girls in their charge .
tossing all three coins generates the values 1 through 8 with equal probability .
and she had said the wrong word about young fitzgerald -- i wanted vanna , with her deep seeing eyes , to say the right one and adjust those cruel values .
we 're considering the function only for real values of x .
a comparison of the relative values of n , in the formula v = n ( r s ) ^ { ½ } , for the foregoing ditch , flume , and pipe will be instructive .
he seemed to feel that those who were without his own knowledge of values were inclined to smile at his enthusiasm , and whenever he talked on his favourite subject there was an undercurrent of sly humour which gave an exquisite flavour to his conversation .
the values obtained in his case were very constant throughout our experimentation and generally showed something like 90 % of correct responses .
that is , rather than adding a constant onto v , one can add a function that takes on different values at different points in space and time .
in the slipper bazaar you pass shop after shop where oriental slippers of all patterns and values are sold ; in the tailors ’ bazaar you find shop after shop where tailors are at work upon oriental garments , and so you go on through one bazaar after another .
the environmental values of the area are recognised through the western port ramsar site , specifically its representativeness , flora , fauna and waterbirds .
this coin , struck at different times , of different weights and fineness , is of different values .
most importantly , the hitler youth did their utmost to indoctrinate the youth of germany with the ideological values of nazism .
bigtable maps two arbitrary string values ( row key and column key ) and timestamp ( hence three-dimensional mapping ) into an associated arbitrary byte array .
note that this only effects the displayed values , series data must still be in the range ( eg ) xmin to xmax .
our dread of studying ethics as a science on account of this divergence of opinion is a hereditary brain tendency , due to the long association of ethical values with one infallible religious text-book , -- koran or bible or talmud or zend-avesta .
`` he is a whole host in himself , and though he values his services rather highly , it will pay in the end to employ him . ''
land values fell , leading to further vilification of his governorship by large landowners and other interested parties .
centre for legislative research and advocacy is an independent , not-for-profit , non-partisan initiative , which works to support and strengthen parliament and legislatures so as to realise the values of democratic governance .
hamilton theorem must hold for , since two matrices that give the same values when applied to each element of a basis must be equal .
but wives and mothers are strange creatures and recognize values which no one else can see .
according to the freedom forum organization , legal systems , and society at large , recognize limits on the freedom of speech , particularly when freedom of speech conflicts with other values or rights .
on the occasion of the royal wedding in october 2011 a set of two personalized stamp sheetlets were issued , both with exactly the same design and stamp values , but for one the main color is orange , while for the second this is dark blue .
he exports things to america , and it 's part of my duty to certify to values and so on , for the customs .
contains all 34 runes in the anglo-saxon fuþorc , their names , meanings , and values in the latin alphabet .
nepp , martin l. nepp on lard and building replacement values , borough of queens , city of new york .
therefore adjusted values have been calculated for many constituents of foods .
a 16-bit integer can store 216 ( or 65,536 ) distinct values .
in this way you can find in the scale the neutral values used in a picture .
those writers know the values of their words and phrases , but to you the words and phrases convey other and uncertain values .
_manas_ , or the thinker , is the reïncarnating being , the immortal who carries the results and values of all the different lives lived on earth or elsewhere .
if the übermensch acts to create new values within the moral vacuum of nihilism , there is nothing that this creative act would not justify .
an appeal to principles is the condition of any considerable reconstruction of society , because social institutions are the visible expression of the scale of moral values which rules the minds of individuals , and it is impossible to alter institutions without altering that moral valuation .
then , here and there , one comes upon lurking values and hidden gems that it quite seems one might as a good new yorker quietly “ bag ” for the so aspiring museum of that city without their being missed .
values of a physical quantity or of a statistical ratio ; these values are usually subject to certain `` errors '' of observation or of random selection ( see probability ) .
for the statesman does not ask for reputation as a reward or consolation , nor is he merely pleased at its attending upon his actions , but he values it because credit and character give him opportunities to do good on a larger scale .
in qft the vacuum is an active participant , and particle numbers and field values are related by an uncertainty principle ; field values are uncertain even for particle number zero .
to have a probability distribution , you need a random variable , and a range of the possible values it may assume .
it will study and recommend what it views as necessary to preserve support for national unity and social peace and protect the foundational elements of society and its highest values , in addition to rights , freedoms and general obligations .
if various values are given , display as a simple range ( if possible ) .
who meeting , it was decided that proteins having values higher than 1 .
the integrand is evaluated at a finite set of points called integration points and a weighted sum of these values is used to approximate the integral .
[ 212 ] when limited to this primary function , it was of advantage to both parties to the exchange , [ 213 ] and merchants and retailers had then a real part in the production of values .
parker , dewitt h. human values .
for comparison of different kinds or sizes a standard method of testing is necessary and the values must be expressed in some defined units .
reference values and ranges for cardiopulmonary exercise testing in a general adult population- results of the study of health in pomerania .
released late 1996 , brought the intellect power type to marvel characters , reprinting all marvel characters released so far , now with intellect values .
the values for the stresses used in design are obtained from tests on blocks of concrete which have gone through the process of setting .
although this aim is stated in the formal curriculum , a subtler , but nonetheless powerful , indoctrination of the norms and values of the wider society .
a function which has no singular points for finite values of z other than poles is called a _meromorphic_ function .
but though he came home on crutches he came back with something which he values more than his leg -- the victoria cross .
down goes _credit_ -- every kind of value shrinks at once ; for the bank has _not_ the real money , and values have been measured by the paper !
we do not commonly assign the same values to the same result .
if this mortgage was ever paid up , another came later -- a mortgage which passed through various renewals and which , as values were falling , was always renewed for a lesser amount and was always demanding ready money to meet the difference .
some reviews praised its dream chronicles-trademarked high-quality production values and tricky gameplay , while negative reviews focused on its very short length ( only 16 main scenes , shorter than the original dream chronicles ) and some repetitive puzzles .
in contrast with hungarian historians who highlight his national , christian and humanistic values , slovak and czech historians came to conclusion that by some positive features of christian-democratic politician , his activities against czechoslovakia were unambiguously hostile .
also in this regard , note that the vis term in the numerator of ndvi only scales the result , thereby creating negative values .
our priorities are further improving our democratic and open economy institutions , accelerated internal development , taking into account all the positive modern trends in the world , and consolidating society based on traditional values and patriotism .
beauty she knows and values , and she is not ignorant or afraid of the power that kindly beauty can exercise in the affairs of men .
the effect that japan 's recession has had on its country has greatly changed their market values on almost all goods as well as their real estate market .
it is not the french of paris , or the french of touraine , but all of same it values better than english -- a language so difficult .
to-day , as in the ages when he sheltered under a rock , he values furs greatly for the winter .
representations with several possible values for are considered below .
i did n't mean that ... she values her independence a great deal . '
their notion of values centres chiefly on things remote from their daily life .
what has become of the values ?
this was what most immediately and most iridescently showed , the truth being all the while that the character took on in him particular values without which it often enough , though then much more grossly , flourishes .
for it is values , values , and again values , that mould men , and rear men , and create men ; and ignoble values make ignoble men , and noble values make noble men !
a description of the constants , as well as some of the average values can be seen in the following table .
an advantage of this approach is that it automatically takes into account the number of tied data values there are in the sample , and the way they are treated in computing the rank correlation .
beauty , old age , callow boyhood , fading manhood , all chase the bubble values of the `` kiting stocks . ''
these were the same as four of the uniques of the series , only their names and values were changed .
food values of salads this depends on the ingredients .
the law of proportionality of values alone can solve this problem .
the modes of life which succeeded to the farmer economy are dependent on cash for the distribution of values , and the '' donation , '' if it remain at all , is a gift of money .
to replace british stamps on the mail sent to north america and the united kingdom , two new values are issued ; 4 pence rose and 6 pence grey .
in general such charts do not show the values of specific volumes , nor do they show the enthalpies of saturated water at pressures which are of the order of those experienced in condensers in a thermal power station .
it has given me a new understanding of colour -- new sense of it , new power with eye and hand , a better sense of values .
he would not suffer from the perversion of values which rates the talent and energy by which wealth is created lower than the possession of property , which is at best their pensioner and at worst the spend-thrift of what intelligence has produced .
the values are responsibility , respect , resilience and reflection .
| certain positions the | fixed numerical values of | which served as | multiplicands .
agrarian radicalism posited the city as antithetical to american values , asserting that jews were the essence of urban corruption .
also , you might try making a table of values to discover the pattern .
not that she thinks me a le notre '' -- alison laughed -- '' what i mean is , she sees behind , she sees why it is fashionable to have a garden , since she has worked out the values of that existence .
the original values are obliterated by black bars on the sheet , placed exactly the same as those described in our note to issue 16 , but only 1 mm .
it is not the mere translation , but the transformation of earthly values .
in this he goes so far as to deny any historical connexion between the two , maintaining with all the devices of an extravagant allegorism , including the rabbinic _gematria_ based on the numerical values of letters ( ix .
because the younger generation has been brought up in this heroic spirit it is no longer understood by the representatives of the former era who judge the values of life according to material advantage ... german life is heroic life .
he tested many of ptolemy ’ s results by fresh observations , and obtained more accurate values of the obliquity of the ecliptic ( chapter i. , § 11 ) and of precession .
system and method patent for general search parameters having quantized relevance values that are associated with a user ( united states patent 7,739,408 ; june 15 , 2010 , co-inventor with edmund j .
yes " to the self-creation of a new world on the basis of nothing ; and his forwarding of the " transvaluation of values " as source of change , as opposed to a marxist conception of class struggle and the dialectic of a linear history .
if p is even then you have to use john blackburne 's argument to show that they are both false and so still equivalent ( in terms of truth values ) .
following filsinger , [ 23 ] we can not regard these analyses as an absolutely trustworthy representation of the “ normal ” composition of the cacao bean , the values in starch , albumin and ash considerably deviating from all that have been established up to the present time .
the black bourgeoisie had been hindered by their color from assimilating into white society , and their newly acquired education , values , and middle-class style of life prevented them from returning to their people .
he was conscious of greater strength , undimmed energy , increased zest ; faltering indeed he was still , not better , not more unselfish ; but he had a sense of truer values , more proportion , more contentment .
it will not dim the light of the values that we proudly present to the rest of the world .
and to speak of transpositions leads us inevitably into consideration of the great secret of corot 's art , his employment of what is known in studios as values .
the artist learned to draw , learned to see values , and , in the end , to be natural .
spring hill has in the past two decades attracted a large number of business chains , reflecting the recent boom in population and the tastes of the recent influx of residents seeking lower property values , quiet suburban life , and a low crime rate .
a binary operation whose table of values forms a latin square is said to obey the latin square property .
summer camps and youth groups were organized to promote conservative values in working-class families , and help them design a career path .
the values of real property will rise , and population will tend to become congested within the localities ' served .
over time , the cowboys of the american west developed a personal culture of their own , a blend of frontier and victorian values that even retained vestiges of chivalry .
one of the chief values of the text is the great number of problems and examples of reasoning to be analyzed that are included .
d. values marked with ?
for a conventional foe that values its military and depends on technology , rapid dominance should be particularly effective and persuasive .
so far we have considered commodities from a twofold point of view , as use-values and exchange values alternately .
the ranzco continuing professional development ( cpd ) program provides fellows ( franzco ) with a structured approach to planning their continuing education , and supports activities that cover a wide range of skills , including further clinical knowledge , risk management , clinical governance and professional values .
when we leave civilization behind us values change , and utilitarian worth counts more than intrinsic value , therefore , the ax becomes more valuable than a whole season 's catch of furs .
pue values become lower " ( gemma ) .
by progressive variation of the phase-instant at which the contact is made , the successive instantaneous values of the electric quantities can be measured and plotted out in the form of curves .
he was discovered to be very apt at capturing by values and trading queens early .
but the relative values of those two different species of food , bread and butcher ’ s meat , are very different in the different periods of agriculture .
in mathematics , krawtchouk matrices are matrices whose entries are values of krawtchouk polynomials at nonnegative integer points .
the implicit structure of a row , and the meaning of the data values in a row , requires that the row be understood as providing a succession of data values , one in each column of the table .
any two gray values unite to form a gray midway between them .
the equation of time values for each day of the year , compiled by astronomical observatories , were widely listed in almanacs and ephemerides .
now and then you find a man who values wealth only as an instrument to serve mankind withal .
each person must determine his own principles of action on the basis of his conception of the nature of the universe and his own scale of ethical values .
the true values sought .
following the islamic business model which adheres closely to the deeply rooted islamic banking principles , the sharia-compliant banking group is planning to be instrumental in bridging the gap between modern financial demands and intrinsic islamic values , for the numerous industry standards and development in europe .
mumblecore films are generally produced with an extremely low budget and low production values .
i choose many different values other than the normal one and it still doesnt seem to make it work .
the velvet masks probably came from france , as they are mentioned in the _book of values of merchandize imported_ , under the administration of oliver cromwell .
mr. sleighter , moreover , had a remarkable instinct for values , more especially for salvage values .
victor toews , the president of canada 's treasury board , stated , " overall , canada is not reducing the amount of money given to the pa , but it is now being redirected in accordance with canadian values .
having obtained in this way tentative values for several signs , he proceeded by inference to guess at other signs , and so tentatively read some inscriptions .
the margin between the schematic values used in dealings with the temple and the actual yield of fields , flocks , and workshops must have given opportunities for some accumulation of private wealth and hence for barter .
some experiment measurement values are listed in table 5 .
the glossary is relied on to contain , besides its other items , all the obsolete words : the homophones separated out from these will show various grades of obsolescence , and very different values as examples bearing on the question at issue .
both candidates are alienated from national , european , and democratic values .
all values except name and first appearance are optional , all information should be cited within the article , footnotes are the preferred method of citation , you may also make use of the references field .
the principle of [ [ mathematical induction ] ] would then let us conclude that p ( " k " ) is true for all ( positive integer ) values of " k " .
because a society needs moral principles , and since romania is traditionally an orthodox country , i think the moral values promoted by it should be kept .
the first definitive series to be issued was the misnamed " archaeological " series of 16 values ; the top four values were produced by lithography and the remaining values by typography .
the values of customary morality .
in the above equations ( ) and ( ) , we observe that the values require are at the faces , instead of the nodes .
he is reminded , however , that it is easily possible to exaggerate the intrinsic values of pens and papers ; in fact the beginner invariably expects too much from them .
extension of multiplicative set functions with values in a banach algebra , acta math .
if it doesn 't change registry values and install files in system folders , you can .
many times it becomes the vantage point of the debate because the values are , many times , the same in a round .
relative values and prices of the cuts of meat the relative retail prices of the various cuts usually bear a direct relation to the favor with which they are regarded by the majority of persons , the juicy tender cuts of good flavor selling for the higher prices .
functions without return values therefore make sense .
then with these tentative values proceed as follows .
i think i have a clear , broad vision of the core values that have made wikimedia successful and the long-term direction in which they head .
there is still a segment of the u.s. population which has little , if any , notion of the values that the space program has for the average citizen .
i had to assume values for these unknown quantities in every experiment , and you can understand what a great number of trials were necessary , using different combinations , before obtaining results .
after placing numeric values to each tester 's perception on each of the variants , a mathematical model was created to develop the final recipe , which maximized the perceived taste while minimizing the cost of the ingredients needed to produce it .
the balancing is usually based upon the design flow values required by the mechanical engineer for the project , and the tab contractor submits a written report which summarizes the testing and balancing and notes any deficiencies found during the tab work .
our clients appreciate the practical guidance about how to engage in ways that are ethical and consistent with wikpedia 's values and culture .
an intellectual circle has sought to permeate all classes , from the top to the bottom , with a common opinion in favour of social control of socially created values .
the lumber values used thruout are the best average prices that could be obtained .
my view on this one point is that present-day values of ancient sums are best avoided .
by the same process by which commodities express their values in gold prices , they turn gold into a measure of value i. e. into money .
the essays consist of such impressions with the name gambia and the proposed values painted in by hand , to shew the approximate effect of the stamps which would be produced from this key plate .
; the ( s. ) _ser_ is of various values ( wilson 's _glossary_ and yule 's h .
property values were rising faster than funds could be accumulated , so bonds were issued and several hundred acres of open space were acquired .
she is also a good critic and a good judge of values .
patriarchal social norms , values , attitudes and behaviors encourage trafficking and make women and girls vulnerable .
but the conflict between these values brings them both into clearer light .
yet not the natural or carnal man for his own sake , but for the sake of the spiritual meanings and values to which he is the key .
ripping-off the system found its own justification in deep alienation and a basic outlaw contempt for conventional bourgeois values .
from the beginning of the conference , sun and air were in league with those who were staging it with such a sense of dramatic values .
it is a simple and elementary principle that all values are created by the productive activity of capital , labour and ability in industrial operations of one kind and another .
it resolved itself into a matter of values , then .
the blocks are also rotated to show different strength values in a step-reduction system .
this absence is equivalent to the setting up of different types of life-experience , each with isolated subject matter , aim , and standard of values .
because dioxins and dlcs act similarly at the ahr , their individual quantities in a mixture can be added together as proportional values , i .
in the case of ring spun cotton yarns , for example , the following values of k have been found to give the best results .
thirdly , the quantitative values of these varying forms is related to their logical significance in the verse and the degree of accentuation which they receive .
we have values which are equal , values the mutual relations of which are known as the half , the quarter , double , triple , etc .
a good trooper values his mount exactly as much as he values himself , and believes , or should believe , that the two together are irresistible where women or men , girls or guns , are concerned .
when data that has been entered into html forms is submitted , the form field names and values are encoded and sent to the server in an http request message using method get or post , or , historically , via email .
consequently , it would not require much of an imaginative flight to conclude that there existed some system of tests of ore and metal values by fire .
banks collected the loan collateral ( foreclosed homes ) but the low property values resulted in a relative lack of assets .
it will perhaps be urged that there are two different values of the man 's life in these cases , and that they can not both be true .
he thought that “ decrement ” would be very exceptional indeed , and that the persistence of increment values is as thoroughly established as any law in the physical world ever was .
in describing certain traits of turkish character i have intentionally dwelt by preference on those which are brightest , because prejudice and detraction have created an impression which calls for a correction of values .
thus his technique presents a bold and vigorous generalization of the values ; often conspicuous for what it omits , as when he indicates the back of a hat or a ruff by a flat tone that is almost uninterrupted by contrasting tones .
once the light-space coordinates are found , the x and y values usually correspond to a location in the depth map texture , and the z value corresponds to its associated depth , which can now be tested against the depth map .
the price of horses would jump to war-time values and every onery cayuse on the range would be hauling a scraper .
mrfs are completely characterized by their prior probability distributions , marginal probability distributions , cliques , smoothing constraint as well as criterion for updating values .
there are certain language features and configuration parameters ( primarily the default values for such runtime settings ) that make php prone to security issues .
there exists some correspondence , more or less precise , between hue values and color terms ( names ) .
how they are handled will affect the values of all the cells in the grid .
these may include pre-written code and subroutines , classes , values , documentation , help data , message templates or type specifications .
his view of `` values '' and reality 98 chapter xi some recent tendencies in philosophy a new philosophy of science .
the contributions of fox to the field are evident in fox ( 1990 ) , in an article in which fox deals with questions of values and nature .
differences seen in the goals and beliefs of east-asian cultures may be due to the values that they hold as a result of naive dialecticism .
i always wondered why ( at least in english-speaking and western countries ) liberal and conservative two seemingly completely unrelated issues ( social values and economy ) become intertwined to form left and right .
on the occasion of a child 's birth , the grandparents were allowed to make only four presents ( according to custom ) , -- including `` one cotton baby-dress '' ; and the values of the presents were fixed .
the two 5 lamp centers are located at equal distances from the distributing pocket or cabinet , p , so that the sub-feeders , a and a ' , have equal values of lamp feet .
she has since stated that she has mixed feelings about her fame , saying that she values byrne 's comics for their entertainment and artistic value , but wishes that more people would appreciate her as more than just shadowcat 's namesake .
we must distinguish between and select real ethical values ; we must be convinced of the solidarity of mankind , of man 's individual duty , to construct for the benefit of the whole race a rich and strong personality .
there 's too much depending on what we're doing , and we must n't hamper our undertaking with dead values that will drag it down .
its fans enjoy the film for the same unintentionally campy production values that made it a hit in the 1970s .
and yet a man of singular values , for all this place seems to wait for his return .
the composition must consist of supporting lines well balanced , and '' values '' filling up the whole surface of the space , which is to contain it , and beyond which it must not seek to extend .
here the code of values imposed by sun yat-sen ’ s thinking in terms of the old ideology becomes apparent .
relinquished the social democratic values of his political party in favor of more economically liberal policies .
currently kasehdia entertainment is involved in television and film production as well as music festival series based on good values .
the history of the forest service has been fraught with controversy , as various interests and national values have grappled with the appropriate management of the many resources within the forests .
the universe of possible checksum values is now the square of the value for the simple checksum .
these values have been used with entire confidence after testing full-sized columns designed with the proper proportions of vertical steel and hooping , and are regarded by the writer as having at least double the factor of safety used in ordinary designs of structural steel .
valerius ' work on the preservation of moral values of the roman republic of the past was widely popular through the age of enlightenment , a literary life-span of some 1,700 years .
in other words 550 feet of the wire will wind a coil of 10.2 inches with an inductance of 8.00 mil-henries , and permit you to bring out taps at all the lower values of inductance which are given in the table .
the war has brought about a readjustment of values .
trade is eager an' values high ; aces-up frequent callin ' for five hundred dollars before the draw .
the city can not fix land values , and we leave to private enterprise , for the most part , the task of determining the city 's limits and the location of its residential and industrial districts .
these cohens tended to belong to haplogroup j , with y-str values clustered unusually closely around a haplotype known as the cohen modal haplotype ( cmh ) .
the values for this parameter are in em 's .
yet the whole system , elaborate as it is , offers but a poor substitute for the marvellous range of individuality that may be expressed on the notes of the piano by instantaneous changes in the values ascribed to single notes .
( ja ‘ 18 ) ward , h. f : labor movement from the standpoint of religious values .
moral values and the idea of god .
as a result all time values undergo a proportionate shrinkage .
she values goodness , merit , and virtue much more than beauty , riches , and amusements .
philosopher robert nozick argues that rand 's foundational argument in ethics is unsound because it does not explain why someone could not rationally prefer dying and having no values .
discussed on the talk page , and clearly explained to interested parties that its values are in-line with that found by other respectable researchers such as those in the ieee etc .
koenig has stated that the core values of non-profit work are reflected in swellpath 's company culture .
in this connection the following comparative statement , prepared a few years since by w. j. thompson , esq. , government engineer in singapore , of the relative values of english and chinese labour , will be found of much interest .
i am trying to figure out how many permutations i can have of 4 values , where the values are integers from 0 to 100 inclusive .
score sheet for the study of values .
people of the whirlpool illustrated '' the whole book is delicious , with its wise and kindly humor , its just perspective of the true values of things , its clever pen pictures of people and customs , and its healthy optimism for the great world in general . ''
every teacher ought to understand this discussion of educational values .
the debate was sparked by proposals to build an art school in norway , and it was therefore essential for supporters of a norwegian academy to argue that norwegian values could not be instilled in the artists if they had to go abroad .
[ 108 ] there are ultimate questions as to what is good and what is bad that no argument can answer ; ultimate values which can not be discussed .
instituto de cultura puertorriqueña ) , or icp , for short , is an institution of the government of puerto rico responsible for the establishment of the cultural policies required in order to study , preserve , promote , enrich , and diffuse the cultural values of puerto rico .
more complex patterns can be built from the primitive ones of the previous section , usually in the same way as values are built by combining other values .
the following are some of the values of [ alpha ] found by townsend for air .
lippmann therefore sees attempts to restore first principles or traditional values as both quixotic and counterproductive .
among these he values not least a '' round robin '' from the sparrows at lord 's , all of whom he knows by name .
they sought their art in the direction of values , and very easily corot took the lead as chief exponent of the new principle ; and he succeeded in applying the principle of values to landscape painting as fully as rembrandt had to figure painting .
reilly factor , and hannity and colmes , defending himself and his values .
a sense of measure , of relative values , is the soul of criticism , and we may be appreciative without condescending to idolatry , or even to flattery .
as a result , land values are extremely high .
its dramatic values lie chiefly in its power to create and sustain a sense of something definitely progressing toward a certain point .
you can not fix values by law any more than you can make cooler summers by shortening thermometers .
in his 2005 book , it takes a family , santorum advocated for a society oriented toward " family values " and centered on monogamous , heterosexual relationships , marriage , and child-raising .
even this wide travel has not eroded their traditional values .
the good russian women seem immensely superior to the men in their instant perception and recognition of moral values , which gives them a chart and compass in life .
citizens and the constitution ( citizenship values under the constitution ) , publications division , ministry of i .
an equation of this form is obtained from each observation , and the method of least squares is then applied to determine the most probable values of _x_ and _y_ .
he stuck to his values and had a even to his final days .
round two was played the same way as round one , except that the point values were now doubled .
and many students and families found that community colleges such as union county college were attractive educational values .
from a mercenary point of view the time was not well chosen for the disposal of her property , values always diminishing in time of war .
the rational in rational egoism refers to the types of values that benefit the ego , not the rationality of the moral position itself .
from the materials presented , students are to objectively extrapolate ideas , and thus form a substantive set of values .
archbishop vincent nichols of birmingham declared his opposition to the act , saying that the legislation contradicted the catholic church 's moral values .
criticisms come from a wide variety of perspectives , but predominantly from the perspective of liberal individualism , from american conservatives concerned about shared traditional values , and from a national unity perspective .
the following are the values of r ( when the rotation is expressed in circular measure ) for the d line and a temperature of 18° c. : -- substance .
it was then that she prayed as only one can pray who values life less than honour ; and when the fiendish touch came she did not yield , but shrank from him and spoke her mind in a voice that is beyond the power of words .
if any prerequisite data values were missing ( perhaps because a particular tank measurement was unavailable at the time ) , calculations were postponed until the data was entered .
prof. s. n. patten says , in `` dynamic economics , '' p. 64 : `` objective values , however , are never a sum , but only a relation between subjective values .
it is undoubtedly true that some values are treated as belonging to objects .
how dare life , with its brutal non-perception of values , withhold so much from one so worthy as myself and give so much to others ?
have been left off in order to make the use of the table more simple , and the values given will be found quite accurate enough for clinical purposes .
sharing of local history may bring a community together through the engagement with common stories and sharing of values , and contribute to building a sense of place .
this black mensural notation gave way to white mensural notation around 1450 , in which all note values were written with white ( outline ) noteheads .
note that the values of the subdomain correction across the interface in general differ .
he is an expert in the areas of business ethics , values , and leadership .
the harmonic proportion implies a strong commitment to the subjective values of the traders .
agreement on the threshold of testosterone values below which a man would be considered hypogonadal has not been reached .
it has been criticised as having poor production values , and poor execution , while recognizing its intentionally camp style and its attempt as a satire .
now sum the values of ωds for the finite surface enclosed by the bounding curve .
he gives two values for the atlantic side , 29.997 and 29.932 .
amazing values -- send at once .
but a new commodity has the charm of its novelty , a charm consisting in the promise , in positive fashion , of new qualitative values about which a new entire schedule will have to be organized .
life , for the time at least , lost its relative values ; the moment loomed larger in his vision than the years , and he beheld the past and the future dwarfed by the single radiant instant that was his own .
nature 's values are imputed to her retroactively by spirit , which in its material dependence has a logical and moral primacy of its own .
they ground their organizing in the moral values and traditions that stem from religious faith , to varying degrees and often quite powerfully .
relative luminance follows the photometric definition of luminance , but with the values normalized to 1 or 100 for a reference white .
the church must pass the burning torch of religious experience from age to age , transmitting the faith of the fathers to the children , and not allowing any spiritual values to perish .
these also are very high values .
in common usage , it refers to the simpler properties when using the traditional operations of addition , subtraction , multiplication and division with smaller values of numbers .
legal and moral values do , in part , derive their power from economic values .
the mature trees in these gardens contribute significantly to the aesthetic values of the campus .
however , they may also help perfect strangers or fight various eccentric villains in exotic locations of their own volition if the cause fits their values ; " ghosts " from their network past also emerge to haunt them from time to time .
sequential problem solving and dealing with interpersonal relations involves weighing various values and determining what is appropriate or inappropriate behavior .
the commissioner presents nearly 200 pages of tabulated statistics covering progress and values .
the analog computer calculated the deflection angle for the guns , taking account of the daily influences , the continuously measured values vo and the tilting of the vehicle .
as such , they may be read in any direction which forms the correct sound values in the context of the glyph .
of atheists there are many ; but there are few , if any , who deny the validity of all moral values : that fidelity is better than deceit , love better than hate , concerning this there is no dispute .
attributes are the elements responsible for storing information in a directory , and the schema defines the rules for which attributes may be used in an entry , the kinds of values that those attributes may have , and how clients may interact with those values .
pity , pity , my wise one , thou canst not fly. ” values once a man unearthed in his field a marble statue of great beauty .
and if any man values it preposterously , it will be neither a great philosopher , nor a labouring man with horny fists , nor a little innocent and natural child .
this , along with the major-market sounding dee-jays , quality production values , reliable news , weather and traffic elements , were key reasons kckn became a dominant station again in a much more competitive marketplace than it had in those early years of radio .
it is to him a picture by a great artist , and he values it only as such .
the mission of geneva high school is to nurture social skills , academic excellence and values enabling students to become responsible , compassionate citizens with lifelong understandings of the arts , sciences and humanities .
paper sizes could vary considerably , and the finished size was also affected by how the pages were trimmed , so the sizes given are rough values only .
as one of the chief values of the exercise is the familiarity with good english which it gives , i need not say that especial attention must be paid to the phraseology in which the story is clothed .
in the present state of astronomical science it is not certain that these values are absolutely correct .
personality is the self-conscious , individual soul , producing out of its own wealth the universal ideal values , and re-absorbing and assimilating these ideal values in their higher form .
the numeric values are the same in any system of units .
he is a middle-aged man of cool temperament and low but clear and keen intelligence , with the complacency of the servant who values himself on his rank in servility , and the imperturbability of the accurate calculator who has no illusions .
when the consumer really values hygienic environment , the producer will supply it .
hyman as , " controversial books that stress the need for jews to base their ethics and politics on classical jewish values rather than western thought and political development .
umvue estimators that have the lowest variance for all possible values of the parameter to be estimated ( this is usually an easier property to verify than efficiency ) and consistent estimators which converges in probability to the true value of such parameter .
the psychologist has nothing to do with the relative values of ‘ motives. ’ he can not teach you how to acquire ‘ control ’ of your actions .
even thus taken by surprise , and even to one so kind , amabel could not tell that grief : deep in her was a reticence , a sense of values austere and immaculate : she could not discuss her husband , even with the kindest of friends .
ucas values the spirit of truth seeking , enterprise , open-mindedness , practicality , ingenuity , creativity and modernity .
mean numerical values , their necessity in modern physical science , 81 .
the feedback item can then be updated by changing the values in the feedback form and clicking " save " again .
his expressionist values would contrast rapidly with a time period in the spanish cinema when the influences from the american movies would multiply ( i .
socialize the child - to homogenize children and ensure that they can fulfill a useful role in society , according to its values and beliefs .
the school gains reputation from its strong emphasis on national values in addition to exceptional academic and leadership achievements .
pride spiritual is a master passion , and certain it is that the creed and ways of fox and penn became to him , as years created habits , of an importance far beyond the pride which values ancient blood or a stainless shield .
a mathematical formula determined by the manufacturer can be used to determine a coagulation index ( ci ) ( or overall assessment of coagulability ) which takes into account the relative contribution of each of these 4 values into 1 equation .
if we wanted to infer the unobserved values we could make an assumption of either constant effect or homogeneity , an even stronger assumption than constant effect .
the values of the gold in the pound sterling and in twenty-five francs approximate very closely .
later , after moving to chicago , she wrote more about the african-american experience , and reflected its values ( political , cultural , religious .
i think these sorts of principles should stay with taking values to heart , rather than codifying what to do in zillions of different specific instances .
clearly , the inferential results are dependent on the values of the hyperparameters θ ( e .
hebrew culture , based on the values of socialist zionism , and imposed it on all later arrivals , at the cost of suppressing and erasing these later immigrants ' original culture .
therefore , to make comparisons between species of various sizes , we scaled out body mass by expressing c_ { mw } as the ratio of measured to predicted values ( c_ { mwr } ; table 7 ) .
i 'm mighty ignorant about such things myself , but they say if a girl does n't mind showing that she 's your friend , and values you in a way , it 's a sign she 's a thousand miles off from falling in love with you .
economic science would become impossible if we admitted as values only values correctly and judiciously appreciated .
the summation of the values of the whorls , if any , in fingers 2 , 4 , 6 , 8 , 10 , plus one , is the numerator of the primary .
the movie was shot in an era when educated people in cities were getting influenced by the western culture hence the people from rural areas who placed a lot of importance to values and culture , strongly abstained from marrying into city people 's homes .
i know , however , that at all events another will reward him for his kindness to me , and one whom he values even more than his sister has happily learned to appreciate him as i do !
the characteristics of each of these so-called _climatic elements_ are set forth in a standard series of numerical values , based on careful , systematic , and long-continued meteorological records , corrected and compared by well-known methods .
if we can trust students at all to distinguish values among the larger thoughts -- as every one knows that we must -- there is the same reason for trusting them to distinguish the relative worths of details .
he watched them as day after day they grew into clean-blooded perfection ; he appraised their values ; he saw personally to their education , helping each one of them individually to become the true representative of the proudest species of animal life .
pfold values are computed using the first step analysis of markov chain theory .
with the privileges and partnership which labor has enjoyed in this great increase of values , it is so far quiet and satisfied ; but unfortunately the inevitable outcome is not so promising to it .
the world war has profoundly changed economic conditions and made it necessary to erect new standards of values .
we began to reconstruct our scale of values : it was not only the giants of the football field who were winning honours for themselves and for the school in france .
data is a set of values of qualitative or quantitative variables ; restated , pieces of data are individual pieces of information .
rather than using one weight value between two layer nodes as in neural network , extension neural network architecture has two weight values .
and what ’ s made us care but these false values that make jane ’ s shame of me ? ''
this mutt is an independent mutt and is the only mutt established by sri manavala mamunigal on the request of srivilliputtur people to give them discourses on philosophical values and sri vaishnava tradition .
in mathematics , the geometric mean is a type of mean or average , which indicates the central tendency or typical value of a set of numbers by using the product of their values ( as opposed to the arithmetic mean which uses their sum ) .
a comparison of the caloric values of sanatogen , cow ’ s milk , sugar and wheat flour .
all of the western states , in the first decade of their growth , were exceedingly anxious to secure settlers who should take up and improve the vacant square miles , thus adding to the population and to the taxable values of the commonwealth .
_our `` ideals , '' our types of excellence , are the various ways in which we figure to ourselves the outreaching and ever-expanding values of our concrete acts._ every achievement of good deepens and quickens our sense of the inexhaustible value contained in every right act .
as the action of the intellect and universal mind becomes more and more identical , the clearer will the relation of all values become .
concerns about the homeless bringing crime and reducing property values in the neighbourhood prompted some local residents to try to get a court order to halt the program .
after you are thoroughly acquainted with the number values of the words you can allow the persons looking on to select any square on the board as the starting place .
because memory access is essentially constant in time complexity ( except for caching delays ) , any algorithm with a component which has worse than constant efficiency over a small input range can be improved by precomputing values .
show five values of purple-blue compared with yellow .
these possible replacement values are assumed to range over a subset of either the real or complex numbers , depending on the equation or inequality under consideration ( in applications , real numbers are usually associated also with measurement units ) .
october 18 , 1918only a week later , rates were doubled and 5,000 each of newly issued stamps were hand-stamped in pairs with the new values of 6h ( blue ) , 10h ( red ) , and 24h ( green ) .
but he goes on , and says , ‘ you see that he values not the loss nor rebellion of the town of mansoul , nor will he trouble himself with calling his town to a reckoning for their giving themselves to me .
“ ‘ watch that play to-day ; you will discover young gill in many of the close-ups where , under my direction , he brought out the psychological , the symbolic -- if i may use the term -- values of the great idea underlying our story .
while segments within the cpc criticized the three represents as being un-marxist and a betrayal of basic marxist values , supporters viewed it as a further development of socialism with chinese characteristics .
`` it may be doubted if continued efficiency could be maintained with such low values as these , and very prolonged observations would be necessary to establish the facts .
besides , it is mostly of the belief that it has _not_ a singular standard of value in its idiosyncrasies of taste ; it rather sets up its values and non-values as the generally valid values and non-values , and thus becomes incomprehensible and impracticable .
representative values are given in the table shown below .
i suppose it can be spelled , but the letters must be given values quite new to me .
the man in woman informs her of the intrinsic values of his sterner calibre , and thus lends her patience with his impatiences , moves her tenderness and care for him in his rougher , more arduous lot , wins her admiration of his enterprises and ambitions .
zero values courtesy of big game info .
the measure should be continuous , so that changing the values of the probabilities by a very small amount should only change the entropy by a small amount .
they might be blunt , but they were undeniably honest ; and contrasted with the false values and the useless accessories of the house , this honesty impressed her as entirely admirable .
it may be doubted , however , by some of my readers whether this sense of social values called judgment is the outcome of suggestions operating throughout the term of one 's social education .
it is not clear-cut because the actions of an enlightened being are such that he values himself and others equally , i .
some points of the riemann sphere that , while not themselves critical , map to one of the critical values , are also included ; these are indicated by having degree one .
these include the guilt that they do not spend enough time with their children , insecurities and values they have are not being in met , and their self-esteem is low because of the fear of judgment .
social and religious conservatives often use the term " family values " to promote conservative ideology that supports traditional morality or christian values .
she had an unerring sense of social values and she made no error in her estimate of the people by whom she was now surrounded .
in terms of fields , it defines how much to rotate the real and imaginary parts of the fields into each other when comparing field values at nearby points .
he has thus far escaped untouched from the constant revolution of values , the propelling force of which is usually unknown to its satellites .
most of the times , the sensor may be measuring some noise and for this example , let us consider that the values being measured are ( 0 ) and ( -1 ) alternatively .
since force and length return to their initial values at the end of each cycle , a plot of force vs .
( 120 ) ten meridians carry the equatorial hues across all these value zones and trace the gradation of each hue through a complete scale from black to white , marked by their values , as shown in paragraph 68 .
before insert triggers allow the modification of the values that shall be inserted into the table .
most teachers can add and spell much better than they can read , because they do not know the literary values and suggestions of words .
[ 210:3 ] the corresponding qualifications for scotland and ireland are slightly different in their conditions and in the values required .
numerical values of the letters .
the system of absolute , immutable values was threatened with destruction .
he had no idea of how boyish he looked -- how much the idealist he was -- how far removed from hard , practical judgment which the world values so highly .
all cash values were doubled from the season 3 payouts , the passengers received a second street shout-out , and all money earned was donated by the passengers to the charities of their choice .
it can also function as a reminder of the mortality of humankind , as an expression of cultural values and roles , and help to propitiate the spirits of the dead , maintaining their benevolence and preventing their unwelcome intrusion into the affairs of the living .
the values found are : sable rudimentary , 16 ; rudimentary forked , 1.5 ; sable forked , 17 .
it is a matter of relative values , since nearly every study is of some worth ; and the detailed decision as to subjects and methods must be left to the expert on pedagogy .
alan brown suggests , however , that berlin ignores the fact that values are commensurable in the extent to which they contribute to the human good .
the salve which he produced from his ditty bag was home-made , for his mother knew all about medicinal herbs and their values .
autorun consults windows registry values to decide whether to initiate actions for any particular drive or drive type .
in protestant countries , in which moral values control religion and sensuous elements exercise little attraction , these figures have already retreated far into the background .
but , on the whole , moral values are much more `` participation values , '' [ 33 ] shared by the whole group in common , than are economic values or legal values .
by the word “ rearing , ” in this case , is meant the act of modifying by means of new and higher values -- values which , as laws and guides of conduct and opinion , are now to rule over mankind .
suppose a button of silver weighing 0.0435 gram was obtained from 20 grams of ore. look down the 20-gram column of the table , and select the values corresponding to each figure of the weight , thus : -- 0.04 = 65.33 ozs .
thus we see that money came to mean simply the accepted unit for measuring , representing and expressing values of and in wealth .
the topics are always about the camp values .
the predicted values from these regressions are obtained .
we should adopt this plan , of course , in the extreme case of there being only _one_ value before us , by just taking that one ; and our confidence increases slowly with the number of values before us .
similarly , pixel values in standard image file formats are usually gamma-compensated , either for srgb gamma ( or equivalent , an approximation of typical of legacy monitor gammas ) , or according to some gamma specified by metadata such as an icc profile .
this is the first of a very interesting and important series of four provisional stamps that were made in st. vincent , in 1880 and 1881 , to supply a temporary want of certain values .
the question had been explored experimentally , but no theoretical treatment agreed with experimental values .
( _a_ ) for what values of m will the roots of 2x^2 + 3mx = -2 be equal ?
if we look at a tree in the way described we see that it is covered with patches of green in light or dark tints and that these color values are the lights and shades of which we are speaking .
this benevolent movement has a spiritual dimension in reaffirming the age-old buddhist values attached to dhammadāna , fast eroding before the hungry waves of commercialization .
when the romans adopted the greek alphabet they took over the symbols with their greek values .
see nimbers for more details on the meaning of nimber values .
do the socially produced land values necessarily belong to the producer , society ?
the discrepancy may cause confusion , since operating systems using the binary method report lower numerical values for storage size than advertised by manufacturers .
all attitudes and gestures compose curves and figures , or cast lines and form angles , which constitute their æsthetic and dynamic values , those measuring beauty , these measuring power .
in this last stage the illuminating and heating values of the gas are determined .
extraordinary values can be had there for one dime , because mr. goldsmith does not like the books .
he claims that sometimes there is no such perspective and that in those cases choices are justified by one 's previous allegiance to the prevalence of certain values .
though seen by many hegemony citizens as barbarians , the ousters have a highly advanced culture that focuses primarily on the fine arts and on aesthetic values almost unknown amidst the many technologies of the worldweb .
demanded her companion ; `` i am sure my master values you as highly as i should like to see him .
the orthodox saw the values of prosperity only in plainness of life , recognized no divinity in humanized manners , and sternly but ineffectually called the community back to idealized commonplaceness , and to hear the utterances of rude ploughmen and cobblers in the name of deity .
this question of values is a difficult one .
by a very simple application of the numerical letter values these 108 decimal places can be carried in the mind and recalled about as fast as you can write them down .
wadihuda educational institution , run by ta 'aleemul islam trust , kerala , is the one educational institution in the region providing education on a developmental approach to the students on solid grounds of values and culture .
the first argument of such a constructor is a reference to an object of the same type as is being constructed ( const or non-const ) , which might be followed by parameters of any type ( all having default values ) .
the erie canal has an influence on values in every township from new york to buffalo , and along the lake shores to the head of lake superior .
thiel ( _ber._ , 1904 , 37 , p. 1135 ) obtained the values 115.08 and 114.81 from analyses of the chloride and bromide , whilst f. c. mathers ( _abst .
but credit is based on values , rather than on concrete goods as such , and if these `` intangibles '' have value , they may have credits based upon them .
the present issue dollar values have no premium , as they can be bought at any large post-office at face .
it is evident that any valuation which includes `` negative values '' must be misleading as policies are thereby treated as assets instead of liabilities , and such fictitious assets may at any time be cut off by the assured electing to drop their policies .
economists teach that no transaction is industrially sound which does not involve an equal exchange of values .
he was seen as loyal to the values of the academy , a defender of its academic traditions , but also ready to support good modern work .
as these feelings are both the ends and the instruments of the moralist and legislator , it especially behoves us to learn how to estimate these values aright , and bentham tells us most distinctly .
the bsa 's stated purpose at its incorporation in 1910 was " to teach [ boys ] patriotism , courage , self-reliance , and kindred values .
so it is to the chemical laboratories that we look for the new values which may make a superpower system financially possible just as it is to the electrical workshop that we look for the inventions which will integrate it into one thing .
the key is regarded as a symbol of guardianship of , and responsibility for , the traditions and values of selborne .
can life 's highest values be so dealt with ?
the piarc experiment was conducted in the usa , japan , holland and germany and included iri values from airport runways and super highways to rough unpaved roads .
michael rust values gold but as dross ; but it is the world ; the cringing , obsequious , miser-hearted world , that kisses the very feet of wealth , which set michael rust on ; it was this that lashed him forward ; but not for himself .
a marked change in transportation thus shifts the level of values in a locality .
basque cooperative of mondragon ) , models of welfare state , including the german one , the british one and the swedish one , and about the basic left-wing values like social justice , positive freedom , public property and social rights .
former values had shrunk by some eight millions .
note that since both hj and h 'j are chosen randomly from h , then if h is large , which would be normal , the probability of the two values not being distinct is extremely small .
the theorem is valid word by word also for stochastic processes taking values in the -dimensional euclidean space or the complex vector space .
the comparison of these values leads to the practical question of translations .
is it even highly unsafe for the latter to assume the responsibility of judging relative values ?
the presence of if-statements in the loop body requires the execution of instructions in all control paths to merge the multiple values of a variable .
every gun in the game has its own individual penetration values and characteristics .
_belief_ is often an essential factor in values .
currents which were upwards during certain hours of the day , and downwards during others , would affect the diurnal inequality ; while currents which were upwards during certain months , and downwards during others , would cause an annual inequality in the absolute values .
with every acceleration in rate the relative preponderance of the interval following the accented element ( in rhythms having initial stress ) increases ; as the rate is retarded , smaller and smaller degrees of difference in the values of accented and unaccented intervals are discriminated .
the correlated color temperature can be calculated from the tristimulus values by first calculating the chromaticity co-ordinates in the cie 1960 color space , then finding the closest point on the planckian locus .
sometimes you need to change two or more input fields 's values based on input of one .
woman and the sea revealed themselves to me together , as it were : two mistresses of life ’ s values .
the organization is founded on anarchist principles of self-determination , cooperation , and liberty , values expressed by the empowerment of everyday activists in possessing non-corporate and non-state-controlled internet tools .
`` the idea of an unearned increment given to private properties by the social organism was talked of in my day , '' i said , `` but only , as i remember , with reference to land values .
a major hegemony in archaic globalization was the roman empire , which united the greater mediterranean area and western europe through a long-running series of military and political campaigns expanding the roman system of government and roman values to more underdeveloped areas .
it may cost him friends , income , reputation , station , and much which he highly values .
as the varying mineral composition and calorific value of oil shale deposits varies widely , the actual values vary considerably .
alternately , is there a way to solve a boundary value problem involving x ( s ) and y ( s ) , where x and y are not allowed to have certain ranges of values for any s .
and since men believed that all the forces present , dying , poisoned culture , were resident in their `` morals '' and their `` christianity , '' it was necessary to smash the tables of these old values .
hyde park has a college-preparatory program that emphasizes christian values .
the class will discuss the values of proper child safety installation , as well as aid in installing your privately purchased seat .
his concerns appeared justified , as the series drifted into camp humor and the production values declined in later episodes .
more generally , the expected value of a function of a random variable is the probability-weighted average of the values the function takes on for each possible value of the random variable .
sketch 3 is a landscape in the same values used in sketch 1 .
ace-ten card games are trick-taking card games in which cards are assigned values so that typically aces and tens are the most valuable cards .
even if its value did sink proportionately with an increase , prices would rise proportionately only if the values of goods remained unchanged .
but still the economical householder has to spend much time in comparing prices and studying values , that he may be sure he is not being cheated .
capital , as we have seen , is a collection of market or exchange values in view of further exchange .
the radio times guide to tv comedy described victoria wood as seen on tv as having " a regular company of fine performers , good production values , incisive scripts and a snappy pace .
rugova traditional games , are among the most frequented cultural events in peć , representing the values inherited throughout the years in the rugoves jane " lojrat tradicionale ne rugove .
maximum typical values for irons are 24 ksi ( 165 mpa ) , aluminums 19 ksi ( 131 mpa ) , and coppers 14 ksi ( 96 .
per piece , or more ; all currency of other money was stopped , hardly any had wherewith to pay ; public securities sank to about a moiety of their original values , and buyers were hard to be found even at those prices .
it is an acknowledgement of an editor who has continued to work actively in promoting the values of good editing and editing practices .
notice however , that the indeterminacy as stated above only applies to values of measurements not to the quantum state .
the general equation of degree n can always be solved to any degree of approximation desired , when the numerical values of the coefficients a , b , ... are assigned .
a more potent reason for the indifference to modern italian music , however , lies in the diverging values of the italian school and that of northern europe .
as a woman of values and principles , she takes utmost care in following the customs and rituals of both the sides , south and north .
he values his own thoughts and reflections too much to sacrifice the least of them to the interests of his story .
transaction logs and database change logs are used , a transaction log records all the essential data for each transactions , including data values , time of transaction and terminal number .
food values .
otherwise conclusions reached about studied societies will likely be coloured by the anthropologist 's own class values .
it also wanted to preserve , maintain and promote rich and diverse cultural values of various tribal groups of kenya .
it is reported that nearly all of the columbian stamps on sale at washington have been disposed of , only a few values being left .
the answer can not be to dwell on our differences , but to build on our shared values .
the belief that they destroy property values wherever they go is now commonly taken as a valid explanation of any unfriendliness toward the entire group .
moral values of modes of conduct have commonly arisen because those modes of conduct were , or were supposed to be , advantageous in furthering other ends .
all these display adapters have text modes in which each character cell contains an 8-bit character code point ( see details ) , giving 256 possible values for graphic characters .
in solid-state nmr spectroscopy , magic angle spinning is required to average out this orientation dependence in order to obtain values close to the average chemical shifts .
you can solve this [ [ diophantine equation ] ] to find values .
the remaining symbols are from the ipa with their standard values .
relative values of chinese and greek , 109 .
although ibm used ebcdic , most text from then on came to be encoded in ascii , using values from 0 to 31 for ( non-printing ) control characters , and values from 32 to 127 for graphic characters such as letters , digits , and punctuation .
thus , such ystem-less individuals experience inconsistent boundaries or values by which to evaluate everyday occurrences .
the values before and after may be set without using parameter names but this may be confusing for later editors .
in addition , the program automatically creates detailed documentation for each conﬁguration , with complete explanations of function calls , macros , parameters , and return values .
designers are in a position to promulgate new values and to define and quantify the effects of those values , and over the next ten years , their optimum role will be to design ' understanding .
the values recognized in the great hellenistic courts and the greek world generally imposed their authority upon the dynasties of barbarian origin .
doing so has necessitated the reexamination and restatement of nearly all basic values of chinese life .
we would need - instead of including a page for given parameter values , this allows linking to a page for given parameter values .
these recommendations are based on human-factor requirements , rather than upon biological considerations , which may significantly modify these values .
this is in marked contrast to the values of the commercial van versions .
as his heart did not contain in it this balance , the triforce splits into its three components , leaving ganondorf with only the piece representing the characteristic he values most , the triforce of power .
although they are less stiff then carbon and inorganic nanotubes , with these values these nanotubes are amongst some of the stiffest known biological materials .
he grinned at her ideas of morning values .
attendance was free , and enrollment was encouraged by the government as an essential step in the communist educational system of developing `` correct '' socialist values and attitudes in youth .
spinoza brought man back into nature , and made him the nucleus of all moral values , showing how he may recognise his environment and how he may master it .
those include use and non-use values .
the french ladies admire my gayety ; the italians are ravish 'd with my grandeur , and if the english ladies do blame my conduct , who values the censure of a little island. -- oh !
each set of specified values corresponds to one system state , which depends on some set of system conditions .
for this , we use three values of resistance data for three known temperatures .
here are we , a long-established firm ( 'limited , entire , ' i suppose we should describe ourselves ) , existing upon the hereditary principle , and yet not allowed to extract any of its living values .
negative values .
corners are detected through the simplest implementation which literally extracts a ring of 16 pixels and compares the intensity values with an appropriate threshold .
in this redistribution of values the sombre retrospect of the previous evening shrank to a mere cloud on the edge of consciousness .
thus , both marx 's calculation of r and the sums of his price formulas do not add up in all the normal cases , where , as in the above example , relative competitive prices differ from relative marxian values .
during a visit to a people with perfect genetic memory who were being taught the values of wayism and faced threat from slavers , rev bem 's genetic material was extracted by a woman who infested herself with his larval offspring .
smd resistors usually are marked with their resistance values using three digits , two significant digits and a multiplier digit .
strategic and institutional approaches , suchman defines legitimacy as " a generalized perception or assumption that the actions of an entity are desirable , proper , appropriate within some socially constructed system of norms , values , beliefs , and definitions .
this contained ptolomaic tables based on new values and adjusted to beijing and has been reconstructed in recent years .
many psychological effects of light have been recorded from experiment and observation and affective values of light have been established in various other byways .
he greatly values their devotion and sacrifice for the faith , and the noble manner in which they are arising to spread the teachings in that land .
from self-nourishment to being fed humanized eating and drinking come with moral values attached to them , foremost the rule of sharing .
inflation is a very tricky thing , people have a very hard time agreeing on what historical inflation has been , that is how to calculate inflation based on what we know has happened to values over the past 40 years .
however , the same pattern may be retraced if the experimental parameters are cycled back to their original values ; in fact , the patterns observed are reproducible over a period of days .
the certain change can come only as the man learns values and respects them by a right life .
there is no standard of values ; even taste is not yet formed , and eyes and ears hungrily reach out for anything to satisfy their voracious appetite .
then -- why , you ask , this new term -- values ?
universities are meant to pass the torch of civilization , not just download data into student skulls , and the values of the academic community are strongly at odds with those of all would-be information empires .
but the principal thing that we know about this young man—who is , indeed , very intelligent—leads us to suppose that , however much he may value your personal merits , he values your money more .
the nsa and department of defense have declassified some tempest elements after freedom of information act requests , but the documents black out many key values and descriptions .
a member of the family of anagarika dharmapala ( who named him ' anil kumar ' ) , he was brought up with buddhist and sinhalese nationalist values , as well as an abhorrence of the colonial power , britain .
values for the density varying from 108 to 113½ , corresponding to values for the atomic weight varying from 216 to 227 , were thereby obtained .
one difficulty was that many tunisians consider the new constitution and the universal declaration of human rights to be at odds with islamic values .
women—and men too—have begun to examine the ideas of morality in which the small and the great values are mixed together like the cards in a shuffled pack .
there is not enough praise or deference to suit the egotist , he turns elsewhere to find the applause which he values above everything .
bn ( k ) ( r ) for suitable values of k .
for our present purposes , however , it is enough to have illustrated the general doctrine , and to have set up the economic values as true social forces .
the 8008 is the direct ancestor of the current core i7 , even now maintaining code compatibility ( every instruction of the 8008 's instruction set has a direct equivalent in the intel core i7 's much larger instruction set , although the opcode values are different ) .
following closely after anandamath , bankim chandra renewed call for a resurgent india that fights against oppression of the british empire with strength from within the common people , based on traditional indian values of austerity , dedication and selflessness .
it will be seen that in every case the observed central values are less than the calculated ; and that the observed extreme values are much greater than the calculated .
whether universal values exist is an unproven conjecture of moral philosophy and cultural anthropology , though it is clear that certain values are found across a great diversity of human cultures , such as primary attributes of physical attractiveness ( e .
he looks forth upon life with a keen vision for comparative values , and gives sane and distinct expression to what he sees .
such currents might arise from meteorological conditions characteristic of particular latitudes , or be due to the relative distribution of land and sea ; but , whatever their cause , any considerable real change in their values between 1842 and 1885 seems very improbable .
`` it 's only your values that are wrong , '' she said quietly .
you want to have actual data on the population growth and changes in real estate values in the areas in question .
nbc acquired the rights to canadian football league games from espn , and aired them with nfl-like production values ; the first four games it showed were all blowouts , however , with poor ratings , and the network gave up .
similar technique can be used to produce a double-quad arithmetic , which is represented as a sum of two quadruple-precision values .
in particular , the values of additive and multiplicative functions are determined by their values on the powers of prime numbers .
if it does so , the entity is required to disclose the aggregate of these fair values and aggregate adjustments from the previous gaap .
in this i am adopting his own values , almost his own phrases .
`` this comptroller of finance , your future master , louis , and mine -- -- '' '' your slave , '' he interrupted lazily , `` and he values his life . ''
and if it comes to a mere question of emotional values , does not one love prometheus all the more because at the last he had , like any man , to give up a little of his desire ?
during his leadership , democratic party of mongolia has launched " mongolian people-2020 " action plan to strengthen the values of democracy and civil society .
this was the first time that the lower house , one of whose old cries had been to revise land values and reduce the land tax , was called upon to discuss a financial measure to which the interest of the constituencies of their overwhelming majority was diametrically opposed .
for insurance purposes , in view of post-war values , they had recently had a professional valuation made of the mills , machinery , office and warehouse buildings in staithley and manchester .
that he regrets not having acquired more school knowledge , that he values what is commonly called education , is shown by the care he has taken to have his own children well instructed .
perhaps this dichotomy of people 's interests in a single species is indicative of the broad spectrum of social and economic values man derives from marine birds .
if this latter is the case , she gives certain values to what he thinks and to what he says which no other woman gives , and so he observes to himself , `` this is the woman who best understands _me_ . ''
as the painter becomes aware of what at first he had ignored , he adds colour to outline , modelling to colour , and finally an observant rendering of tints and values .
( _i_ ) _terminals._—there is no one feature of the entire problem so big with possibilities , and so far from solution , as that of terminal property values and their proper assignment .
in no case has the selling price been based on farm values .
the term _bear_ is applied to those who sell short stock , with the purpose of depreciating values .
the `` moral '' values that have been for years attributed to athletics appear after all to be the effects of intense , enthusiastic , and interested participation in teamwork -- that is , in purposeful and energetic concern with joint undertakings .
in linear regression mean response and predicted response are values of the dependent variable calculated from the regression parameters and a given value of the independent variable .
madison in vain laid the fall in land values in virginia to the uncertainty and low prices of the crops , to the quantity of land thrown on the market , and the attractions of the cheaper and better lands beyond the mountains .
e ( i - i ) ( k1 + k2 ) ² hence if we determine corresponding values of x and i we can deduce the value of [ alpha ] /e if we also know ( k1 + k2 ) .
in general , pregnancy women have low blood pressure compared to their normal values .
when one has in charge a treasure which one values greatly , and which , if once made known one is pretty sure to lose , i suppose the impulse of most men would be towards a hiding- place .
possible values include , , and .
_radial velocity of the stars._ from the values of α and δ at different times we obtain the components of the proper motions of the stars perpendicular to the line of sight .
the modern ethical thinker is convinced that morality is but the harmonious adjustment of an individual to his social group ; it is the sensible foresight which selects the active values which attract and express man 's nature .
you should be able to simply add a locator map to the infboxes without having to resort to x and y values .
for one can not be alone with the stars and be unmoved by them ; they are serene with eternity , refulgent with the perfect beauty of a perfect creation , eloquent to the heart of man and woman of true values .
_re_ case groups of war neurosis , several writers speak of dangers of contagion , but also emphasize the values of contact of patients with one another in the securing of therapeutic results .
we have little beyond the surface values of the timber and the soil .
even the six-inch shadows of the box bushes were quoted at fancy values ; and shedding our outer garments one after another , we eventually emerged at the further end in an almost aboriginal state .
bohm interpretation , which treats the wavefunction as real , position and momentum as definite and resulting from the expected values , and physical properties as spread in space .
as you have observed , true values are not the same as the nominal value .
so long as custom reigns , as tradition prevails , so long as social values are determined by instinct and habit , there is no conscious question as to the method of their achievement , and hence no need of psychology .
in lambda calculus , functions are taken to be ' first class values ' , so functions may be used as the inputs , or be returned as outputs from other functions .
the attacks and time consuming , unproductive attempts at neutral edits have shown me that it is better for me to concentrate on my real-life activities and not fight for a neutral point of view on a site that has a clear liberal bent and values verifiability over truth .
in your own case , for example , we have scores of chairs that are good looking and that are good values .
even if the area does not change over time , it should always be added along with any new population values in order to calculate density .
with a generation which holds so lightly by tradition , which revises and revalues all accepted values , these aspirations and beliefs might well drop out of its poetry .
how those values can be so accurately determined in a compound brick is beyond our knowledge .
the latter types of values in effect represent the possible " states " of an iteratee .
_missionary of culture , _ aristocrat , representative of the triumphant and ruling classes and their values .
introduction ( contains information about tiff administration , usage of private fields and values , etc .
the federation movement protects and enhances the well-being of jews worldwide through the values of tikkun olam , tzedakah and torah .
american community based on respect and shared values .
and everywhere in paris and in london young men boasted of the garret , and claimed to have no need of what the crowd values .
in sculpture there are no accessories of background , no gradations of colour values to attract the eye and deflect the mind from thought .
the total float of a path is the combined free float values of all activities in a path .
the exports from the beginning of the century have been reckoned upon the values entered by the exporters at the custom-house .
these variables retain their values across subroutine and other code boundaries , and are thread-safe since they are local to each thread , even though the code which accesses them might be executed simultaneously by another thread .
in addition to typical data values , the data value store contains a special type of data for storing relationships between tables .
the values which he apprehends must be harmonious , and so far above the plurality of goods as to transcend and unify them .
since it is the mission of rotc and the air force academy to produce leaders , aas enhances that mission by building these values into cadets early on , and ensuring that they maintain these standards .
the cic called canada 's withdrawal of all aid and support to the gaza strip " a resounding slap in the face to canadian values .
in popular use , hispanic and latino are often mistakenly given racial values , usually non-white and mixed race , such as half-caste or mulatto , in spite of the racial diversity of hispanic and latino americans .
i want to help preserve the freedoms , values and traditions that help make this a great country to live in .
her characters must confront their own pasts as well as learn to accept the values and pasts of others .
property values have risen dramatically in recent years since the completion of the wendover bypass , which removed a lot of traffic from the town 's narrow streets .
in the same fashion how boolean values or binary numbers can be inverted , geomantic figures can likewise be inverted .
yaw rate control is a system that maintains the yaw rate of a vehicle , for example a car , according to the values requested by the driver .
thus , i have pointed out how legal values may be measured in terms of money , as when the fine for one offense is five dollars , and that for another twenty-five .
rather than the rigid bureaucratic structures and nationalist agendas of old terror groups , these new operatives are networked , relying on decentralized decision making with flexible ties between other individuals and radical groups sharing common values .
but even at the present prices the choicest varieties of nuts are cheaper than meats if equivalent food values are compared .
he promotes issues such as the right to bear arms , the fairtax , christian values , alternative media , and the military .
a small town bheemasamudra in chitradurga district as one of the major business centre of areca nut business which is being transported to various parts of our country and abroad for further conversion as several values added forms of areca nut .
in reference to the play 's classical structure , themes and characterisation , shaffer has discussed the conflict between apollonian and dionysian values and systems in human life .
_different modes of transport are more or less economical relatively to the other industrial conditions._ not only new routes but new agents of travel change the scale of values .
the first is caused by the finite precision of computations involving floating-point or integer values .
personality traits and values that hippies tend to be associated with are " altruism and mysticism , honesty , joy and nonviolence " .
fcdbs provide values for energy and nutrients including protein , carbohydrates , fat , vitamins and minerals and for other important food components such as fibre .
and the added profile does actually change the rgb values while it is being displayed .
released as a launch title for the xbox one , ryse received mixed critical reaction from reviewers , being praised for its high production values but criticized for its repetitive and simple gameplay .
on the right is a simulated result for a 3 segment curve , in which i discretized the curvature domain so that the curvvatures can have values only from a finite discrete set , leading to about 100,000 possible combinations of curvatures .
the required operation time is achieved here by adjusting the values of r and c .
our company was built on great ideas and core values including discipline , quality and risk taking .
in the officially approved constitution the christian values and ethos of the college are described .
language is like money , without which specific relative values may well exist and be felt , but can not be reduced to a common denominator .
that in itself is problematic from a contractual point of view regarding the uploaders , but it 's compounded by the uploaders adjusting colour values .
better than we of caucasian stock , you know that only so may all the values be fully realized which are to be africa 's contribution to the spiritual wealth of america and the world . ''
protestantism has mellowed and absorbed values and interests which it would once have repudiated as irrelevant to the tremendous drama of salvation .
you probably need to get some more data points for values 7 and 8 .
81 ) be any two sections of the pipe for which p , z , l have the values p1 , z1 , l1 , and p2 , z2 , l2 , respectively .
he was known for his photographs which evoked the artistic values and composition of chinese landscape paintings .
we are still the most wide-hearted and receptive of people , a people that can not live if it does not make its own the spiritual values of the other peoples .
settingindex ' specifies which of the list of possible values this power setting will be set to .
with the instincts of old loves and old admiration we grope about in a realm of values , and we almost believe , `` that is good which pleases us '' ... .
and yet i can not decline to accept an approval which my heart values so highly. ” in parting he extended his hand .
the investigation , however , did not find evidence of a " conspiracy " to promote " violent extremism or radicalisation " values .
deducing any information from those bits requires guessing some other values and the chance of guessing them correct is very low .
monitoring and maintaining compliance is not just to keep the regulators happy , it is one of the most important ways for an organization to maintain its ethical health , support its long-term prosperity , and preserve and promote its values .
the price of farm products increased materially and the home and foreign markets were greatly extended , the results being seen in the increase in farm land values and a more rapid payment in full of farm mortgages than ever before .
the proof of this rule on the part of the weak is to be found in our political instincts , in our social values , in our arts , and in our _science._ *** the _instincts of decadence_ have become master of the _instincts of ascending_ life ... .
so long as societies thus fatuously sacrifice their highest values will every other kind of social reform be nothing but a work of penelope , of which the night will undo what the day has done .
it is in three values -- ½ anna , 1 anna , and 4 annas , all of which are rare , and worth from £30 to £60 apiece .
airy gives mean hourly values for each month of the year .
services that read information from those databases will not return actual values , but values as they were at a time interval equal to the lag earlier .
and they accumulate during the lifetime of the individual a great mass of psychological values .
the trainees learn the value of loyal friendship , telling the truth , listening carefully , persisting under adversity , completing tasks , resolving conflict without violence , and similar values .
governor ted strickland 's spokesperson stated that the governor " values helen jones-kelley 's years of public service as a dedicated advocate for the most vulnerable among us .
but it is a very different thing in practice , where the coefficients are complicated numbers , given with decimal parts , and where the numerical values of these coefficients may be very different in the same equation , some being very great and some very small .
marx explained this contradiction by the fact that in real economic life prices vary not randomly , but in a systematic way from values .
family values such as nurturing children and encouraging them to do well in school need to be promoted as well as a non-authoritarian approach to parenting .
in thelemite beliefs , this was followed by the aeon of osiris , a period that took place in the classical and mediaeval centuries , when humanity worshipped a singular male god , symbolised by the egyptian god osiris , and was therefore dominated by patriarchal values .
on this reasoning there is room for a handsome profit , but the argument is based rather on fictitious market values than on the intrinsic normal producing power of the soil .
the adc has a fixed and limited number of output values , so the scale cannot detect changes smaller than the step size of the adc .
`` no use for you and me to discuss the _moral_ values of anything , leitzel , '' said walter ; `` our points of view , as i 've said before , being too widely different .
many instruments have been devised for registering mechanically the areas of closed curves and the values of integrals .
it takes its values in the unit sphere in and since it is compact , there is a convergent subsequence converging to .
point values scale of points .
abelard reynolds had made a fortune from the increase in land values , and both he and his son william had interested themselves deeply in the intellectual and moral advance of the community in which they lived .
yet he seems to have dreamt of presenting nothing but tactile values : hence his many drawings with only the torso adequately treated , the rest unheeded .
the foreign policy is based on the same european values and , in the internal politics , the same elements of social responsibility can be detected .
and those who are always on the look out for false values , sentimental values , will never learn what art really has to teach them , what art alone can teach .
he was pained by esmonde 's conversion to communism in 1920 and his rejection of the liberal values associated with the higgins name .
these values are set assuming 1,350 innings played ( 150 games of 9 innings ) .
the party characterizes itself as a socialist , nationalist party based on the european christian system of values .
mr. tucker stood watching them for some time , and then , with a glance in the direction of the “ george , ” where he had left a very small portmanteau , he did a hasty sum in comparative values and made his way to the railway-station .
founded in 1994 , cprn produced several hundred research documents on a wide variety of public policy issues , including citizenship ; diversity and canadian values ; productivity and skills ; health and an aging population ; and the environment .
domains are therefore pools of values from which actual values appearing in the columns of a table are drawn .
all the characteristics associated with literacy are characteristics of the underlying structure of practical experiences , values , and aspirations embodied in the printing machines .
in 1998 , stevenson launched a free , faith-based youth magazine called soul purpose , aimed at young people and attempting to promote christian values and morals .
arthur young prepared elaborate tables to show the relative values of ox-labour and horse-labour , as applied to different soils under varying conditions [ 1292 ] .
that is the question of news values .
hazardous land uses ( toxic storage and disposal facilities , manufacturing facilities , major roadways ) tend to be located where property values and income levels are low .
our values remain from our christian and humanist heritage .
the creative man or the man working objectively must often condemn the emotional side of his personality to a partial development ; he must for the sake of his work renounce many family values important for this emotional side of his being .
constitution - mission statement , core values , goals etc .
these various properties , together with the lack of correlation to traditional asset class values , make tangible investments a means of reducing overall investment risk through diversification .
she has carried out research on environmental lifestyle and environmental values .
standard fita targets are marked with 10 evenly spaced concentric rings , which generally have score values from 1 through 10 assigned to them , except in outdoor imperial rounds under gnas rules , where they have score values 1 , 3 , 5 , 7 and 9 .
taxable values for properties within municipalities that are charged a tax have dropped due to the mortgage crisis , further decreasing local coffers .
marcia , i think , values them also , but -- to a stranger , i suppose they would all seem old , dingy and worthless , though to me they are real treasures .
within this structure , education is the practical experience of stabilizing optimal modes of interaction centered around values expressed in language .
( 4 ) but the most imperious need of life lies in the tracing-out and paying heed to these extrinsic values , these after effects of conduct .
moreover , holder said , the navy seals conducted themselves in a manner consistent with american values , and that the parameters of the mission included capturing bin laden .
is a doctrine with values and opinions which you can fairly oppose .
some lenders may agree to write down mortgage values ( reducing the homeowners obligation ) rather than take even larger losses in foreclosure .
a1c values can also be entered in the software for tracking and viewing improvements .
background values are subtracted and care must be taken to avoid external sources of radiation in a nuclear medicine department .
pynchon refused to buy it , believing it best not to broadcast the english colonists ' weaknesses , and also wanting to keep market values steady .
one can quickly tell that none of these values of b2 are squares .
he had no profound apprehension of social values , and no clear-cut conception of a social career ; but he appreciated her loyalty to her lifelong home and to all its belongings and surroundings .
here the observed variable for each observation takes values which are either 0 or 1 .
the novel is about southern women making the ultimate sacrifice for the confederacy ; it promoted national desire for an independent national culture and reflected southern values as they were at that timemacaria is a book with an apocryphal past .
a is the check digit which has 11 possible values from 0 to 9 and a .
the sufferings of a dog , and of a man , have different values .
the harvard independent 's faith zhang remarked that quiet seems in part a gentle rebuke to a culture that values style over substance .
early immigrants to quincy came predominately from new england seeking better land , bringing with them progressive values , such as public education and abolitionism .
moreover , the proposed functions for smr correction factors calculus reduce doubts about what score to assign to values near the border of the discrete classification .
if the region is undisturbed , very fairly approximate values are derivable from the charts , but when the highest accuracy is necessary the only thing to do is to observe at the precise spot .
the first teethe mission of the first tee is to impact the lives of young people by providing learning facilities and educational programs that promote character development and life-enhancing values through the game of golf .
then there is always the probability that it represents the values of adults rather than those of children and youth , or those of pupils a generation ago rather than those of the present day .
last year she was quite friendly with me until i said to her that i thought it was ill-bred to base social values on money .
hence there is no likelihood that they can be brought under cultivation fast enough to halt or greatly retard the advancing values which follow upon the growth of population and the increased demand for agricultural products .
once we have chosen a specific coordinate system , the numerical values of the coordinates of any two points are uniquely determined , and based upon the properties of the space being discussed , the appropriate metric is mathematically established too .
alito 's opinion " no court or legislature has ever suggested that unwelcome speech directed at another 's ' values ' may be prohibited under the rubric of anti-discrimination .
“ in cases of simple barter , where no money is used , we estimate the relative values of the commodities to be exchanged in dollars and cents , it being our only universal measure of value .
the values of companies in war-sensitive sectors such as oil and arms are affected by political decisions to make war .
this sinusoidal model can be fit using nonlinear least squares ; to obtain a good fit , nonlinear least squares routines may require good starting values for the constant , the amplitude , and the frequency .
we do not find the motivating power of existing values in the ashes of burnt out desire !
essynth is a non-deterministic method of sound synthesis once that its resulting sound is not fixed for the same parametric values but continuously evolves along time .
gurudevan , as he was known by his followers , led a reform movement in kerala , rejected casteism and promoted new values of spiritual freedom and social equality .
now , the sample in the oven is heated up on predefined values .
in connection with the counting of whorl values to obtain the primary , it might be noted that when the whorls outnumber the other patterns more speed can be achieved by counting those patterns and subtracting rather than by adding the whorls .
a series of experiments made with this crane is recorded in table xxi. , and a comparison of the calculated and observed values will show that the formula _p_ = 0·0556 _r_ represents the experiments with considerable accuracy .
the values bearing this watermark are ½ anna , 8 pies , 1 anna , 2 annas 9 pies , 4 annas , 6 annas , 6 annas 8 pies , 12 annas , 1 rupee .
neither letty nor any of her kind can to-day even for a moment swerve me from my clear perception of values .
community - when people find an individual or a group that shares the same values , likes , beliefs , etc .
the amade ( association mondiale des amis de l 'enfance , or world association of children 's friends ) prize is awarded to television programs that encourage non-violence , in keeping with amade 's aims and key values , mostly focusing on children 's rights .
they do not correlate with the density values .
calculation is being done in realtime and settlement values are being published daily .
what should one call this but the brave triumph of values conscious of having to be almost missionary ?
emancipative values constitute the single most important factor in advancing the empowerment of women .
however , in real world contexts , and context is ubiquitous in the real world , we must apply truth values .
if veblen has in mind the contrast between goods whose values rest in labor-pain or marginal utility , on the one hand , and values which rest in a folk-psychology on the other hand , the contrast is a false one .
such a chunk brought back to earth might be worth an emperor 's ransom -- but who could think of such values here ?
it states that the number of asymptotic values approached by an entire function of order ρ along curves in the complex plane going toward infinity is less than or equal to 2ρ .
ascii does n't define characters for the values 128 through 255 , and in early days computer manufacturers used these values to hold non-ascii characters like accented letters and box-drawing lines .
you will find oddball values - that 's fine , we know that there will be manual clean-up and will do that ourselves .
she was a woman imbued with the wisdom of a keen appreciation of values , and she knew well the value of encouragement to a young girl like tessie , but the latter was very miserable , and could scarcely hide the fact .
the paper also gives an overview of forrester 's model of world dynamics that correlates population , food production , industrial development , pollution , availability of natural resources , and quality of life , as well as projections of those values into the future under various assumptions .
jewish care is not just jewish values in action ; it is actually the best of british values in action .
the belknap neighborhood association opposed the gasoline station based upon existing binding elements prohibiting a gasoline station , expected impact on traffic , environment , property values and quality of life .
this is due to many different things , but principally to your lack of observation , your inability to see things in their right relations , and your limited sense of values .
bid him , as he values life , ' she said , ` call in those forty men whom he would send to punish the beni aroun people .
we were evidently in the presence of new facts and of a new standard of values .
it is evident that a commodity possessing all these advantages must have some intrinsic qualities which all exchangers would recognise -- that it must be a standard of value -- at once a commodity possessing real value , and a measure of all other values .
however , if your buffer contains raw objects or out-of-sequence values , then the return string would be result of instead .
dogmatic , superstitious , intolerant , overbearing , and violent as he was , he yet had that inscrutable prerogative of genius of transforming what he touched into new values .
the norwegian humanist association is an organization for people who base their ethics on human , not religious values .
both values are known with the embossing shewing a distinct double impression .
are you going to have all your presents paraded on the study-table , for everybody to pull over and compare values , -- and have one mortified , and another elated , and all uncomfortable ? ''
that capitalization is admittedly _twice_ the value of all the tangible values -- trackage , rolling stock , terminals , shops and other -- owned by the roads .
all this happens , because there is no eternal -- no over-world of over-individual and over-historical values -- present .
suppose you establish to your own satisfaction a method for assigning sound values ; how will you reach the differences in vowel sounds that prevail in the united states ?
its high technical and artistic values allow it to successfully compete for viewers against contemporary soap operas .
but the practical choice seems to be between the earliest and the latest values , though there is no doubt whatever that a distinct =h= was heard in all these sounds long after the fourth century b.c . ]
it is then not only impossible to confine sex to mere reproduction ; it would be a stupid denial of the finest values of civilization .
the fundamental difficulty in the art of war is in the application of its theories in order to test their values .
it can provide greater control over lower values than simply decreasing the time the film spends in developer , as well as enhancing the response of paper to low values during printing .
the investment thus made has paid a dividend already , in an altered thought , a chastened spirit , a recast of our table of values .
it was first systematised by the numerical values assigned to it by phœnician traders , who carried it into greece , whereby the greek signary was delimited into an alphabet .
booz allen condemned snowden 's leak of the existence of prism as " shocking " and " a grave violation of the code of conduct and core values of our firm " .
dollars , pounds , shillings , doubloons , ducats , moidores , joes , crowns , pistareens , coppers , and sous , circulated indifferently , and with various values in each colony .
patel credited his mother for instilling within him an early appreciation of the values of nonviolence , empathy , self-less generosity , and spiritual penance .
judge billings , shrewd calculator of human values , quite audibly disclosed his belief that at least three of the newcomers would have to be run out of town before they were a day older , possibly astraddle of a rail .
i did not see anything governing the use of non-breaking spaces with regards to percentages or monetary values , and thus left those measurements alone .
add that the secret of the success of modern french art lies in its recognition of values .
another example of what might be considered by some to be excessive issues is that , at the time of the millennium , the united kingdom issued 96 different stamps over about 24 months , all for pre-existing values with the same four rates for each set .
amelia is a modern opera with traditional values .
this table 's values are based on list of iso 639-1 codes .
unfortunately these are only the average paths ; and as with most mean values , represent a value not often experienced in fact .
in this theory , students are socialized from an early age and hold different expectations or values based on their own experience or social situation .
sources of land values , 297 .
it is better to apply the gamma correction with the display hardware ( most modern display adapters support this feature ) , or as an active intermediate step of the rendering software through color management , which preserves the original color values .
what need had she to hear when she could read in his eyes that instant admiration that a woman values most ?
was he losing his sense of values ?
in practice , the ncmi team is organised into smaller teams with responsibility for specific areas , and their ministry work includes organising conferences for teaching and disseminating their values , along with visiting relating local churches as guest speakers and to provide advice and support for local leadership .
the old gentleman , who shrewdly values this devotion at its worth , is crying : ' i wo'nt eat anything more , i tell you -- i shall be choked -- got an eye to the estate , i suppose ! '
perhaps all that the younger generation has the right to ask is a spirit of tolerance and even respect for all loyalties which attach themselves to things of good repute , and a more catholic admission of all human values into the class of spiritual things .
this uncompassionate clearing away of accepted values prepared the way for the books which were to come .
in 1848 , to the first volume of bunsens egypts place in universal history ,  birch contributed a long list of hieroglyphics , with descriptions and statements of their separate phonetic and ideographic values .
walras ' law - states that budget constraints imply that the values of excess market demands must sum to zero .
this progress rests on the fact that the magnitudes appearing in the mathematical formulas were no longer regarded as certain definite values ( or values to be arbitrarily determined ) , but as _variable_ , that is , values which may range through all possible quantities .
during the golden age of athens , politics and manmade laws guided human conduct , and the city state was viewed as a manifestation of the highest human values , giving rise to political philosophy .
an anonymous reviewer of siegel 's book says of stock that she " recoiled from vanity or exaggeration , values that are evident in her extremely competent and brutally honest portraits .
this has resulted in a very substantial increase in property and land values , making the town an ideal location for property developers .
_diminishing values._—the above is only a particular illustration of the general tendency of all values to diminish with every improvement in tools , machinery , economy of materials and saving of time , as the world gains wisdom in applying labor to the meeting of material wants .
in 1985 , rugova canyon was declared as protected monument of natural heritage due to its geological , hydrological , landscape , speleological and botanic values .
leelavathi grows up to be rebel in the house and stands up against the conventional values of life .
other than that if the plant has polytheistic values , how it cannot be added .
data-flow analysis is a technique designed to gather information about the values at each point of the program and how they change over time .
against some of these values are suggestions as to belts often recommended in connection with these constants .
the importance of these results as to the scope of consciousness and of attention does not lie merely in the fact that we are able to state the relation of both in values that can be expressed in figures .
the desire to incorporate the community was due to several factors , including inadequate safety provisions , pub parties , preservation of property values , and the retention of tax revenue .
an august 1 editorial responded to the questions by asserting that murdoch intended to " maintain the values and integrity of the journal .
the advance publication of the quantities of the various denominations to be issued gave speculators the hint as to the most desirable values to `` corner '' , and as a result the 1/2 cent and 6 cent stamps were a special mark in all quarters .
if values fluctuate during the interval of criminal possession , he must compute the amount of his debt according to the values that prevailed at the time the lawful owner would have disposed of his goods , had he retained possession .
the function g ( x , x ) is the student 's t-statistic for a new value x , to be drawn from the same population as the already observed set of values x .
995 zen culture did not spring upon the japanese islands as an alien force , dislodging native beliefs , ideals , and values .
he combined enlightenment ideas with christian values , cameralist plans for central control of the economy , and a militaristic approach toward international diplomacy .
the rare kind words of the stern , explain it as we will , and unjust as the preference must surely be , one values beyond the frequent forgivenesses of the gentle .
if one has trained one 's eye to detect the symptoms of decline , one also understands morality , -- one understands what lies concealed beneath its holiest names and tables of values : _e.g. , impoverished_ life , the will to nonentity , great exhaustion .
these will continue to grow and may be harvested several decades later , or may be left to die of old age and contribute ecological values to the site .
production values were modest , owing to dumont 's humble facilities and a thrifty sponsor ( quality drugs , representing most of the nation 's drug stores ) .
this creation of tangible wealth out of intangible assets is seen perhaps at its neatest in the enhancement of land values by the endeavors of interested parties .
if the characteristic values deviate from an extremum , the parameters need to be varied until optimum values are found .
few persons come to middle life without some conception of these relative values .
s. c. ind._ , 1906 , p. 128 ) gives these values : -- _______________________________________________________ | | | | | | saponification | acidity , | iodine | unsaponifiable , | | equivalent .
it is impossible to write a real history of the values of the precious metals in ancient and medieval times : the sources of information are too few .
in practice , analyses have demonstrated high levels of convergence between expert and cba standards with values quantifying those standards highly correlated ( pearson rs ranging from .
emporis is one such service , which uses height and other data to give point values to buildings and add them together for skylines .
so , as mr. riggs points out , the physical property of a going business may not be valued as so much junk , even if the non-physical values are to be determined separately .
this method is specially suitable for statistical data , where the successive values of u represent the area of a figure of frequency up to successive ordinates .
the speaker does not intend to argue against the possibility of placing fairly accurate values on reproduction or present value , but wishes to bring out the fact that it is not as simple as the lay mind is often led to believe .
this perspective results from seeing life in relation to one 's hierarchy of values ( the multilevel view ) and the subsequent appreciation of the potential of how life could be , and ought to be , lived .
the meanings , and values , and connections of things die away .
but how canst make it tally with the vast ideas of this churl 's chivalry and heaven-aspiring nobility of soul , that he so little values liberty , the noblest , most divine of all things , not immortal , as to reject it thus ignobly ? ''
indeed , miss , do not imagine yourself the only person who values the truth .
examples would include liking chocolate ice cream , or endorsing the values of a particular political party .
once such a set of values of thermodynamic variables has been specified for a system , the values of all thermodynamic properties of the system are uniquely determined .
show me the individual , young or old , who sets any thing like a just value on moments of time , and you will show me the person who values , in a proper manner , its larger divisions .
with that spirit , i have faith that out of it will come a sounder life , a truer standard of values , a greater recognition of the results of honest effort , and a healthier atmosphere in which to rear our children .
charity business education is determined to create a campus that promotes " scientific and islamic discourse " to foster an islamic culture that will instill in its students , knowledge and skills based on islamic values .
more recent analysis suggests that the epistemology of wikipedia derives from the combined epistemic values of wikis and of encyclopedias .
the court stressed that if the exercise of the right to peaceful assembly and association by a minority group were conditional on its acceptance by the majority , that would be incompatible with the values of the convention .
by all these means the child is learning social values .
one can not but wish that an index accompanied the paper , as its usefulness would be thereby greatly increased , particularly as , by its arrangement , such subjects as depreciation , non-physical values , etc. , are treated of in many different portions of the paper .
this delicate operation was affected gradually and in such a manner as not to disturb the monetary or exchange values of the country .
the forecasts made by the livingston survey of its variables are compared with actual values reported by the bureau of economic analysis ( in its survey of current business ) , federal reserve board , and bureau of labor statistics .
it is usual practice to speak of nominal impedance as if it were a constant resistance , in most applications , there are a number of values of nominal impedance that are recognised as being standard .
he took the result down on paper and worked their separate values out at his own market prices .
the consequence of the new act was that old dutch coins would be void for payment , and indonesian rupiah coins would be issued with values of 1 , 5 , 10 , 25 , and 50 sen under the remit of the indonesian government .
there are separate cleartype registry settings for gdi and wpf applications , but by default the wpf entries are absent , and the gdi values are used in their absence .
the non-circular velocities will introduce scatter around this line , but with a large enough sample the true function can be fit for and the values of the oort constants measured , as shown in figure 2 .
investigation is also made into laws recognized by states that fail to consider personal and cultural values of human rights and dignity .
in practice it will be found convenient in substituting metrical for british weights and measures , to reduce the values of all numbers to one-tenth by moving the decimal points , and this has been done in the tables appended to the descriptions of the volumetric solutions .
touch gives him his only means of expression ; it is to him what relief is to the sculptor or what values are to the painter .
the score is meant to indicate the likelihood that a customer will pay the loan back on time and in a consistent manner ; values which show behavior contrary to these are more likely to worsen the score , and vice versa .
the process of technological evolution culminates with the ability to achieve all the material values technologically possible and desirable by mental effort .
moral training should begin with the babe , and therefore the mother and primary teacher need stories that have ethical values as early as they need mother goose tales and jingles .
wayland had been long enough away from the confused values of more civilized lands to know belladonna eyes from starlight ; and he knew what his being craved was not carrion .
the “ planks ” of the platform were abolition of the house of lords , home rule , disestablishment of the church in wales , taxation of ground values , and one man one vote .
during a metastable state of finite lifetime all state-describing parameters reach and hold stationary values .
the numbers a and b are elements of f , and the symbol ( a , b ) takes values in the second k-group of f .
the values in the banner data can take parameters .
the confucian classics codified a set of values held by the officials .
although each school was founded independently , the schools shared a common mission , values , and constituency , and eventually decided to work together as a comprehensive prek-12 system under the name of lancaster mennonite school .
ginseng , which has a forked root highly prized in china for its supposed medicinal and aphrodisiac values , was nearly eliminated by eager “ sang ” diggers who sold the roots for export .
in the later one simply changes the values of parameters such as temperature , pressure within a given flowsheet .
for given values of n and [ theta ] we have two possible values of [ .psi ] provided n exceed a certain limit .
properties are assumed to vary continuously from one point to another , and are averaged values in the rev .
and while thus man is appraised by himself and others according to his work , woman in her heart values herself—and wishes to be valued—according to her love .
derek hopes to push values and conservative issues .
both values are nearly identical to those of our moon .
a service can have multiple inputs and outputs so input to the java method is a map , called context , from argument names to argument values and returns output in the form of another map , called results .
and it seems as if each finds lacking in the other that which it values most and thinks of first .
the for loop that iterates over the htmlcollection of " a " tags ends up having fairly weird values for the keys .
unable to cope with the sudden shift in values from enforced and artificial equality to primitive , pirate capitalism - the populace retreated to acrimony and bitterness .
it can not be assumed , therefore , that c in equation ( 8 ) is constant , and in fact it is found to vary for different values of b/h2 and b/h1 , and must be ascertained experimentally .
a _conditional_ equation is not true unless certain special values are assigned to the variables .
average ; having an intermediate value between two extremes , or between the several successive values of a variable quantity during one cycle of variation ; as , mean distance ; mean motion ; mean solar day .
but these phases and values have diverse origins and do not permanently hang together .
love has been nothing but a subordinate incident , almost one might say an ornament , in the early epics ; in apollonius , though working through a deal of gross and lumbering mythological machinery , love becomes for the first time one of the primary values of life .
for reproductive models the weighted average of independent random variables with fixed μ and σ2 and various values for wi is a member of the family of distributions with same μ and σ2 .
he instructs slocum to recite the values of the 4-h that he advises the men to follow .
but she values it above everything she possesses , except that pencil drawing of the hands .
the quoted claim that cosmic noise forms " a few percent of the signal your tv is picking up " lacks any quantitative values of power or criteria for why cmb is purportedly visible .
booklist described viola as a young woman focused on her own feelings of recklessness and abandonment , and " couched " or stuck in using " stolen " american phrases but with a firm grip of filipino values .
therefore a criticism which is based on the greek view is impelled to assign to art a place , the place of sovereignty in its scheme of values .
and robert stephenson was now on his way to inaugurate it as one of the great commercial values of the kingdom , and of the world .
wither 's _emblems_ , `` that old book and quaint , '' long-desired , when he finds it at last , he values none the less because a child had coloured the plates with his paints .
confucianism holds one in contempt , either passively or actively , for the failure of upholding the cardinal moral values of ren and yi .
as with home receivers , it was further recommended that studio monitors incorporate similar color correction circuits so that broadcasters would transmit pictures encoded for the original 1953 colorimetric values , in accordance with fcc standards .
these values no longer correspond to their namesakes in modern disk drives , as well as being irrelevant in other devices such as solid-state drives which do not physically have cylinders or heads .
the word moses is משה ( 5 + 300 + 40 ) , and the sum of the values of its letters is 345 ; jehovah—the genius _par excellence_ of the lunar year—assumes the value of 543 , or the reverse of 345 .
all lists of values of goods are given as lists of prices and everybody understands these prices and can compare the prices in one list with those in another .
in abandoning " legitimately on premises " for the doctrine that we announce today , we are not forsaking a time-tested and workable rule , which has produced consistent results when applied , solely for the sake of fidelity to the values underlying the fourth amendment .
normal .00029 0.5 normal .00025 0.1 normal or more dilute solutions .00020 the volume of solution used should be multiplied by the values given , and that product multiplied by the number of degrees which the temperature of the solution varies from the standard temperature selected for the laboratory .
every find of `` values '' in a placer is unquestioned evidence that somewhere , above the present deposit , there originally existed primary depositions containing the valuable metals or minerals .
made with these a total of 56,216,533 livres ( all these values being those estimated in america ) .
a good interpretive theory clarifies people 's values .
network optimization by random variation of component values .
that will mean a rise in the scale of values of what one may call the intellectual virtues -- the duty of truthseeking and truth speaking .
to the majority of civilized countries gold and silver are foreign products : and the circumstances which govern the values of foreign products present some questions which we are not yet ready to examine .
picture sorts results are graphed to visually represent commercial viewers ' moment-by-moment image recognition ( flow of attention ) , positive and negative feelings ( flow of emotion ) , and brand values ( flow of meaning ) .
the posterior gives a universal sufficient statistic for detection applications , when one wants to choose values for the variable subset which minimize some expected loss function , for instance the probability of decision error .
all was dismay and despair , except in those who had sold out in time , and turned delusive paper into solid values .
if the settlement were to be increased the baupost group stands to make gains on bonds that they bought at very low values .
in developing the image , some artists focus on the shapes created by the interplay of light and dark values on the surfaces of the body .
anderson in his survey of tunis ' world war ii era writings ; that parents , administrators , gamblers and other adult fans " injected improper values " into amateur sports .
the integration policy is aimed at strengthening of estonian identity among the nation 's populace , to develop shared values , identity and , pride in being a citizen of estonia ; with respect and acceptance of cultural differences among estonian residents .
during those thirty days , therefore , the war-broom sweeps with a most commendable thoroughness ; and all the more so , because after that date everything must be paid for at market values .
the ratio of increase , as the word '' decimal '' implies , is 10 throughout , and the numerical values of the consecutive positions increase as they recede from the decimal point in each direction , according to the terms of a geometrical progression .
the values thus obtained for some of the assyrian signs made it possible to read many of the words , their meanings being determined by a comparison with the persian columns .
but no one has to know the history of cultural values .
their fuel values are about the same .
destriers are given a values ranging from seven times the price of an ordinary horse to 700 times .
take the values of a and b ( § 324 ) , supply them in the equation given , and work out the value of x .
i would define spirituality as respect for the value and values of one 's self and others .
he also became a member of the executive board of the civic organisation memorial , working for public awareness of human rights and democratic values under the repressive conditions in the ussr .
this consisted of 500 sheets of each of the values ; that is , 15,000 stamps of each denomination .
on the other hand , when r raises p , it must also overcome the friction 0·025 , therefore p can only be 0·425 - 0·025 = 0·40 ; and r is thus found to be a mean between the greatest and least values of p consistent with equilibrium .
`` [ 81 ] without land nationalization the process of nationalizing industry can not be expected to proceed faster than it pays for itself -- for we can not reckon as part of the national profits the increased land values national enterprises bring about .
[ 168 ] [ 168 ] to avoid mistakes i wish to say here most emphatically that , according to rickert , the method of history is regarded as completely *free* from subjectivity as soon as its “ values ” are once *established* .
the values armenian and georgian are unsupported .
the horizontal spaces represent money values , each space representing .2c ( two mills ) .
since the indices take various integer values to select specific components of the tensors , a single tensor equation represents many ordinary equations .
she had discussed dowries and settlements since she was fifteen ; and took the current values of wealth and birth for granted .
he had a keen sense of dramatic values .
as a whole , the work showcases her use of two-part counterpoint , repeated use of single-note values , and economical intensity of musical material .
in other words , the film was edited according to the soundtrack and not according to the inherent story values .
in the classical cases , already , one knows that useful information is contained in the values and behaviour of the l-function at points where the series representation does not converge .
the particular origin of the doctrine which conceives the relation between form and content as the sum of two values is also to be sought in the doctrine of the sympathetic .
moral and spiritual values , without whose appreciation no man can approach happiness , were yet lacking in the formal curriculum .
but as given they are _not_ determinate values .
it was no longer commonly believed that special exercises had specific therapeutic values , as hippocrates and galen once preached .
like many of the other balmain industries such as the former balmain power station , the colgate-palmolive factory , and the many shipyards , boilermakers and docks scattered about the balmain foreshores , the lever brothers factory lost out to the ever-increasing property values in the area .
the luminosities of the following colours were taken by the above method , and subsequently we shall have to use their values .
perhaps the hurt to her heart and her pride had altered magsie 's sense of values .
islamic culture and values .
society and culture went through a process of conflict and eclectic assimilation of the traditional and elite values on the one hand and the emerging folk and foreign influences on the other .
we retain , however , the literal values of the clock-tower and the buildings underneath it , and express as nearly as we can their interesting variations of texture .
note that these values are all non-positive , because has a length-zero edge to each vertex and the shortest path can be no longer than that edge .
it must be remembered that the values of u are only given `` correct to seven places of decimals , '' i.e .
-- -- values .
it is extremely difficult to `` see '' the direction and effects of the successive cuts for more than a few of the lowest values of n .
i think the importance of drawing lines is so that as scientists we can successfully transmit our culture and its values .
the passive with ma- from words with pa- varies in meaning , owing chiefly to the various values of words with pa- .
the table itself can be essentially a collection of " raw data " values that do not even need to be compiled and could be read in from an external source ( except in specific , platform dependent , implementations using memory pointers directly for greater efficiency ) .
but when using just the electromagnetic fields , the effect depends on the field values in a region from which the test particle is excluded .
this overemphasized the individual and his values , attitudes and personality .
however , as stock values fell , companies were in a vicious circle where not only their investments soured , the debt remained after issued warrants expired , weakening the companies ' capital base .
neither father nor son had any understanding for the true values of life ; they cared nothing for beauty in nature or in art , and they both despised their fellow-men .
but to infer , from these truths , that any natural or artificial causes , which should raise or lower the values of corn or silver , might be considered as matters of indifference , would be an error of the most serious magnitude .
where , therefore , such values are attempted to be arrived at , it will be understood that the calculations are our own , and pretend no more -- for no more could be achieved -- than a rough estimate of probable approximation .
if nodes are cumulated , then the numerical computation of the divided differences is inaccurate , because you divide almost two zeros , each of which with a high relative error due to differences of similar values .
again , the extremest `` shortness '' of vowel sound , as in `` and '' or `` if , '' will not prevent such syllables from being indubitably long in certain values and collocations .
knowin ' that ev'ry coin o ' kindness spent bears interest in yer 'eart at cent per cent ; measurin ' wisdom by the peace it brings to simple minds that values simple things .
and all this in tactile values which compel us to grant the reality of the scene , although in a world where real people are standing , sitting , and kneeling we know not , and care not , on what .
the magazine theorised the retrieval of national and italic values , as promoted by the cultural policies of fascism , but also looking at wider horizons within europe and using a vivid artistic dialectics with a return to a classic figurative source .
in addition , uniformed sa men were employed as a display of threatening force in order to coerce jewish persons to dispose of their property at greatly reduced values .
complete series were issued in 1888 , 1889 , 1890 , 1892 , with some additional values in 1891 , columbian 2c .
chapter x lithographic colour printing -- _continued_ printing inks -- varnish -- reducing medium -- relative values -- some useful hints -- bronze blue -- vermilion -- ink mixing -- ceramic transfers -- colour transparencies .
the point forms part of an antarctic specially protected area ( aspa 140 ) , comprising several separate sites on deception island , and designated as such primarily for its botanic and ecological values .
early writers tended to depict female artists by correlating virtues which were traditionally held by women with similar values gleaned from interpretation of their paintings .
a dollar is not value , but representative of value , and , at last , of moral values .
attention is directed to these tendencies because in our present emphasis on the relation of the farmer to his community and on community values , we must not lose sight of the fact that the family must ever be recognized as the primary social institution of rural life .
the political thinker who values his reputation will always write in terms of tendencies rather than in terms of states .
so if the observable for the position on the x axis is x then the " values " of that observable have to be eigenvalues .
& cebú 1,633 694 2,743 3,165 total 2,925 2,313 3,551 4,187 included in table of 4,201 total export values , p. 639 .
for time series processing , five types of missing values are provided .
she said the commode 's price tag was an " errant value " assigned by the selling agent and apologized for " not paying close attention to specific ' assigned values ' placed on the pieces .
`` i am going on very important business for señor velasquez , captain , '' pursued chivey , with infinite assurance ; `` as you may judge , for he values your care of me at one hundred crowns to be paid on your next visit here . ''
one of the possible solutions involves recruiting another system that pays attention to changes in object values .
disdain and scorn ride sparkling in her eyes , misprizing what they look on ; and her wit values itself so highly that to her all matter else seems weak .
in numerical analysis , a quadrature rule is an approximation of the definite integral of a function , usually stated as a weighted sum of function values at specified points within the domain of integration .
vplzcntd , vplzcntq count the number of leading zero bits for packed double- or quadword values .
if the slope in the scatter plot is negative that means that we have a sort of checkerboard pattern or a sort of spatial competition in which high values in a variable in location i tend to be co-located with lower values in the neighboring locations .
the theorem states that any estimator which is unbiased for a given unknown quantity and which is based on only a complete , sufficient statistic ( and on no other data-derived values ) is the unique best unbiased estimator of that quantity .
he must look for the principal thought until he finds it ; and , having found it , he must _nurse_ it by recalling it every few minutes , while using it as a basis for determination of values .
it was now discovered that men had been deluding themselves with a merely visionary prosperity -- that all values had been wildly inflated ; and it became the sad and surprising experience of very many that their fancied wealth had , in part or wholly , disappeared .
local organizations include the kinsmen club of brantford is an all canadian non-profit service organization that promotes service , fellowship , positive values , and national pride .
in addition to meeting the primary need for shelter , structures functioned as integral expressions of their occupants ' spiritual beliefs and cultural values .
the accompanying table will give the calorific values and general properties of the principle liquid fuels .
this curious indifference of the memory to values of time and space may be due to the extraordinary physical and mental stress under which the impressions i am trying to chronicle were received .
herein is to be found a fundamental contrast between the value of money and the values of other goods ( 119-120. ) .
using a dynamic understanding of identity allows nat-cult identities to retain their inherent values and also to avoid nat-cult caricatures .
split dollar plans , where the death benefits , cash surrender values , and premium payments are split between an employer and employee , or between an individual and a non-natural person ( e .
then distances are blotted out , and the values of nearer objects are transformed under the swirling drifts of vapour , and a new dream-world is created under one 's very eyes .
the actual world has not been surrendered to the devil in name , but it is treated as a display of physical forces incapable of generating moral values .
such advantage can probably be gotten in some degree from every study , and the intrinsic values of each study afford at present a far safer criterion of educational work than any which we can derive from the theory of formal discipline . ''
without a meaning in life , there is no scale of values .
her experience had been so limited that she knew no values .
but over the years , senior wmf personnel have shown poor understanding of our values and processes , sometimes acting with hostility .
the park encompasses a wide spectrum of natural values from forests to wildlife that must be protected and managed to reflect the purpose for which it was created .
replacing all values greater than 1 by 1 , the limits can be made to be 0 or 1 according to the order .
seny as a particular characteristic of catalan society is based on a set of ancestral local customs stemming from the scale of values and social norms of traditional catalan rural society .
then as a contrast there are the lives of religious people leaving as far as moral values are concerned much to be desired , and probably , in many cases , most of all by themselves .
from 1914 on , a portrait of william tell himself was used for values between 10c and 30c .
it had all seemed jolly enough up at the sanatorium , but when he was back in the house , and life re-established its old values , he began to regret it very heartily .
the other question is how much of the classical literature really depends for its values chiefly upon its form .
i strongly support the values of the project , especially the npov principle , and i believe i can help enforce these principles fairly , while also eliminating vandalism of wikipedia .
effort can never realise purely spiritual values ; the essence of all happiness is sensuous enjoyment , however refined that may in some cases be .
the post-modern is probably the closest we have come to the expression of awareness and values about art in art , a generic hall of mirrors .
_re_ values of intensive reëducation , vincent ’ s technique and results have logical resemblances to those of yealland and of kaufmann .
this red swan you are following is the daughter of a magician who has abundance of everything , but only this one child , whom he values more than the sacred arrows .
in a market , it is true , values are established and their amounts are expressed in ways that can not be adopted in primitive life .
there is a significant uncertainty in these critical mass values .
the probability distribution function ( pdf ) representing the distribution of values in x and can be denoted as f ( x ) .
i have long felt that one of the very great values of a congregation of this sort is that resulting from personal contact with men who are doing the same work .
in the case of quantum numbers of electrons , they can be defined as " the sets of numerical values which give acceptable solutions to the schrödinger wave equation for the hydrogen atom " .
this suggests that japanese people believe emotions exist within the environment , between individuals , in line with collectivistic values .
in these target problems , situational dysfunctional emotions , behaviors and beliefs are assessed in regards to the client 's values and goals .
the public religion research institute ( prri ) is an american nonprofit , nonpartisan organization dedicated to research and education at the intersection of religion , values and public life .
the asphalted pipes give rather variable values .
here he reveals himself as a man of considerable endowment : as in giotto , we have tactile values , material significance ; the figures artistically exist .
these all have their roots set deep in our emotions ; they are the measure of life 's values .
however , the first form keeps better numerical accuracy for large values of x , because squares of differences between x and xav leads to less round-off than the differences between the much larger numbers σx2 and ( σx ) 2 .
i could not help , however , feeling mortified that such advantage should be taken of their childish ignorance of values .
however , the sitcoms surrounding african american characters did not reflect the actual societal values of the time .
he asserted the inviolability of human rights and expressed deep concern at the nazi regime 's flouting of the 1933 concordat , its treatment of catholics and abuse of christian values .
today , as an affiliate of union college and the other union university colleges , union graduate college values its rich and multi-varied connection to the liberal arts and sciences .
the laws have now directed a resumption of financial equality with other nations , and have ordered a return to the basis of coin values .
the values for calculated theoretical indices of aromaticity also increased with counter-ion size .
i found that they would be equal if the sea had everywhere the same depth ; i found further that in giving to this depth convenient values one was able to augment the height of the tides in a port conformably to the observations .
this is actually the type of change presented by the quantitative relations , which are given as proportional values in the following table .
this may suggest that a distinction may properly be drawn between measure of values , and ultimate standard money .
a diagram is made which reproduces exactly the values of the corresponding pressures at different points in the travel of the piston ( fig .
scale it down , get at the real business and human values , and it ought to win -- and win big ! ''
to live out of doors seems to be a little matter in the way of change , and that it should have remarkable moral and intellectual values does not appear credible to such as have not had this experience .
kelvin cosmic microwave background radiation , quantized galaxy speeds , sloan great wall of galaxies , and the values of ( pi ) and ( e ) .
his early values shape his politics .
moreover , users can inspect values returned from javascript functions .
sub-saharan african art represents spiritual notions , social norms , ideas , values , etc .
the quakers and their children lack precisely those elements of aesthetic breeding which would be legitimately derived from contemplation and enjoyment of beauty aside from ethical values .
paul 's work explores and parodies the glamorous way of life with seductive and dramatic effect , accentuated by an excellent sense of colour and powerful abstract values .
[ [ sidenote : this is worth ... sidenote : thes be worth ... _all values ( li .
both have separate commercial values .
some of the most important values for arabs are honor and loyalty .
all the three first mentioned values were perforated b only , this we know because no other variety of perforation exists in any of these stamps , the issue of which was in all three cases confined to this one printing .
the film was lauded for its high production values , but many critics dismissed it as an overly glossy biopic .
the stretch of time is not uncountable but can have only three separate values .
i 'm saying that content contributions are best measured by looking at the content of the pages the user has created , and the number of references and footnotes found and added ( which values the research work that the candidate has done ) .
for example , there is a question over whether christian schools should attempt to enforce a specific religious doctrine , or whether they should simply teach general " christian values " .
to deduce the numeric values of the solutions from the output , one has to solve univariate polynomials with approximate coefficients , which is a highly unstable problem .
[ footnote 39 : to agree with pfaundler 's formula the end ordinates should be given half values in determining t '' , _i .
when the physical unity of a group is perpetuated by the succession of parents and children , the racial temperament , including fundamental attitudes and values which rest on it , are preserved intact .
the number 0 is the maximum number in the first partition , the number 1 is the minimum value in the second partition , both are boundary values .
our post from various countries today brings us much news about the propagation of our pact for protection of cultural values .
the instinct of the herd values the _juste milieu_ and the _average_ as the highest and most precious of all things : the spot where the majority is to be found , and the air that it breathes there .
some of the passengers understood only the barest essentials of english , and were plainly confused over the values of a strange currency .
the computational calculations confirm the shortening of covalent bonds which is believed to favor higher elastic constants and hardness values .
wikipedia specific templates for some particular pages ( with limitations on the acceptable values ) with other general purpose date computing templates .
at a later time , the application supplies ( or binds ) values for the parameters , and the dbms executes the statement ( possibly returning a result ) .
fugazi opted to retreat from the in-your-face production values of in on the kill taker and instead worked to create an ambient sound which would display greater depth .
as a problem in psychology , we have been considering the nature , use , and measure of values of the resources , faculties , capacities , and powers of man as an individual intelligence .
its owner is a bookman of the old type , knows values and authors , has studied his profession in england and france and caters to the collectors and lovers of the printed word .
neither of these values is ever actually found in determining coefficients of heredity in the parental relation ; these are usually between 0.3 and 0.5 .
the substitution of money for barter makes no difference in exports and imports , nor in the law of international values .
professor drake 's schedule was related to his concept of a perfect walnut and the various values were related to this on a percentage basis .
representation and form ; a study of aesthetic values in representational art .
it was living upon the work of others , profiting by values for the creation of which the pay had to be low enough to permit of profit .
it is hardly an exaggeration to multiply the list of mere values by 20 to bring it into the terms of modern currency .
repainting shanshui is a series that zhang hongtu began in 1998 to explore the parody of values and conventions of chinese and western art .
the resonance of these changes lasted through the centuries following the renaissance not only in the writing of humanists , but also in the education and values of europe and western society even to the present day .
the have all the same tools , the same core values and the same objectives .
but if in addition to interchanging the names of the values we also interchange the names of the two binary operations , now there is no trace of what we have done .
the idea of promoting any particular set of values is anathema to the ideal of creating a neutral encyclopedia , and is firmly rejected by the project .
throughout the range of rn of this investigation , the values of the lift-curve slope for the smooth sections are very close to that predicted by thin-airfoil theory ( 2π per radian , or 0 .
this value ( becoming obsolete ) does not represent the total amount of energy within the hydrogen , hence the efficiency appears lower than when using the more accurately defined values .
he rejected the austere and literalist anglicanism of his up-bringing , but retained some religious faith and decided to join the unitarian church , impressed by its scientific approach to christian doctrine and its progressive and tolerant values .
these methods , collectively called [ [ probability bounds analysis ] ] , provide algorithms to evaluate mathematical expressions when there is uncertainty about the input values , their dependencies , or even the form of mathematical expression itself .
the measured values of g ( s ) for the neutron and the proton are twice their magnetic moment ( either the neutron magnetic moment or the proton magnetic moment ) .
in belgium , the very successful indian diamond community in antwerp , almost all of whom are jain , opened the largest jain temple outside india in 2010 , to strengthen jain values in and across western europe .
our actions must always be consistent with our own system of values .
match method is easier for this sort of small range of possible values .
his mainstay was family-oriented films based on human values .
in most european countries there is still no proper balance between the expenditure of the state and its income , so that inflation continues and the international values of their currencies are fluctuating and uncertain .
in addition to the convenience of its location beside the highway ( given the ownership of an automobile ) , this revitalization has driven up property values by 47 .
our progress in the arts and sciences and in the creation of values in general has been dependent on specialists whose distinctive worth was precisely their divergence from other individuals .
many chinese families use traditional confucian values to teach their only child .
the reason for this was explained in the chapter on '' values . ''
i would use decision trees with net present values , but if money was not involved you could use some other value or figure of merit .
says hopkins , " cellular automata are simple rules that are applied to a grid of cells , or the pixel values of an image .
every revision of moral values originates in some vexation , and ends by refining and deepening moral sentiment .
this leads finally to very different values of carbonate concentrations at equilibrium when one compares with quoted relationship in this remark .
combining in one generalisation the various suppositions made in this paragraph , we estimate the depreciation of land values resulting from the proposed tax transfer as somewhere between twenty and forty per cent .
it includes the content of courses ( the syllabus ) , the methods employed ( strategies ) , and other aspects , like norms and values , which relate to the way the school is organized .
such a situation would of necessity be temporary , since the aim of the central authority would be to balance values in such a way that there would be an equilibrium all around , with no surpluses and no deficits .
such incidents , to which no one is immune , can not be discarded since the experience of market transactions is an experience in human values , no matter how relative these are .
politicians , professors , lawyers , doctors , no matter what our calling , our judgments are determined by the old scale of values .
though he writes in many genres , he himself values his fictional work more than his other writings .
an example of such nature , is education , the process of transmitting knowledge , skills and personal and cultural morals , values and ethics to another .
a yard-stick does n't measure values .
similar warnings were issued in 2003 in a christian reflection on the new age which characterized new age activities as essentially incompatible with christian teachings and values .
by the time dances such as the lindy hop reached mainstream white audiences , however , they had often been reworked by white teachers and film studios to accord with the aesthetics and social values of white mainstream america .
nor were the subterranean arched sewers of etruria channeled in a trice ; nor the airy arched aqueducts of nerva thrown over their values in the ides of a month .
note that , due to risk aversion , the values of cost and loss measured above need not be the same as the monetary values even in the case that they depend only on monetary values .
morally , the realization of these values , and the further effects upon character noted above , depend greatly upon the terms under which the marriage union is formed and maintained .
every one , of course , goes to church on sunday morning ; no glasgow man who values his character durst stop away .
her standard of values seemed toppling before her mental vision .
just use the parameters which you need ; empty values will not be displayed .
beginning with large values of h , this rearrangement allows elements to move long distances in the original list , reducing large amounts of disorder quickly , and leaving less work for smaller h-sort steps to do .
what are the underlying bases of the values of railroad securities ?
authority and hub values are defined in terms of one another in a mutual recursion .
( _b_ ) large quantities of highly ferruginous slag are produced which carry copper values , and which also demand special attention in operating .
over-supply of any stock depresses market values , and increases the cost to the pennsylvania of raising new money .
hirsch may have contributed to cultural values espoused as learning standards and guides .
as we proceed from the records of such cases to those of cases showing mental deterioration we observe a gradual reduction in the values of reactions , contraction of the mental horizon , [ 1 ] and the appearance of the phenomenon of perseveration .
browning his psychological curiosity , tennyson , as before him shelley and wordsworth , moral values that were not aesthetic values ?
through internalisation individuals accept a set of norms and values that are established by other individuals , groups , or society as a whole .
breast cancer culture values and honors suffering , selecting its she-roes by a " misery quotient " .
but , as like as not , what brashleigh thought about chiefly was his drawing and his brush-work and his values ; probably the revelation of the sitter 's soul was an accident .
the not frequently used page-replacement algorithm generates fewer page faults than the least recently used page replacement algorithm when the page table contains null pointer values .
the definition of the lebesgue integral is not obviously a generalization of the riemann integral , but it is not hard to prove that every riemann-integrable function is lebesgue-integrable and that the values of the two integrals agree whenever they are both defined .
it is by virtue of his life-long search to find in such mighty interests as these their rational consistency , that mental values of the highest grade pervade and signalize his character .
finally , the union pacific railway commission estimated the actual cash profits at $ 23,366,320 , and remarked that the obligations incurred by the railroad company represented a very much larger sum , being measured by the bonds and stock at their par values .
homes also provides users with informative and entertaining articles , plus useful real estate tools to help home buyers track home values and obtain mortgages .
as a result some negroes who secured property there proved damaging to property values , just as would persons of a similar type from any other race .
the international rshm network of schools spans nine countries and three continents , a borderless community that shares common goals , values , and vision .
the somewhat arbitrary choice of starting values produces a bias in the calculated values .
the discovery of the correct alphabetic values of egyptian signs was most useful for reading names , but for translating the egyptian language a competent knowledge of coptic was required .
although robust bayes methods are clearly inconsistent with the bayesian idea that uncertainty should be measured by a single additive probability measure and that personal attitudes and values should always be measured by a precise utility function , they are often accepted as a matter of convenience ( e .
`` i despise that miserable industrialism that values the product more than the man .
conduct in general and values in general become impossible under his system , because there is no such thing as an activity-in-general of the organism .
her face was turned from me , and she was wearing a high-necked gingham apron faded to varying values of brown and faint purple and violet of a quite surprising beauty .
up to may , 1868 , only the values from 1 to 12 cents had been noted by the stamp papers as having been found with any grille .
table showing the best values of bridge arms for measuring any desired resistance | | position of| | best values of| commutator| | | plugs as| value of resistance being measured | | | shown in| | a = | b = | fig .
added to this came the materialism which laid stress upon the values of what was materialistic and mechanical at the cost of the soul .
in all this varied experience with the scenic masterpieces of the national park system , frank kittredge maintained a sincerity of purpose in safeguarding the natural and historic values of the parks .
door of lions ] if we had revelled overmuch in the art values of the cathedral , san isidoro administered a prompt corrective .
thus gold furnishes the standard of value with which all other values are compared .
the sustainability challenge ) the last part looks at emancipative values from a broad civilizational perspective and discusses their significance in history .
confidence intervals consist of a range of values ( interval ) that act as good estimates of the unknown population parameter ; however , in infrequent cases , none of these values may cover the value of the parameter .
klauber , 1956 ) and values for mice of 2 .
this property subsists for every species of function which remains continuous for all the values of _x_ comprised between _a_ and _b_ .
the aces are given the numerical value of 1 and the jack , queen , and king of each suit are given the values 11 , 12 , and 13 respectively .
with the single exception of jan vermeer , who approximated the _plein-air_ of modern art , they transposed the hues of nature into a scheme of color which is none the less arbitrary and unnatural , although it preserves the values of nature ’ s coloring .
in particular , feeling is specially and directly related to motor values , which thus become to the self-observant or to others observant an index or expression of the feeling .
when he conversed with them they answered thoughtfully in subdued tones , seeming to feel that their words were received by one who placed upon them undreamed-of values .
there might be a more recent table of values somewhere , though .
he sees himself neither as misogynistic or a promoter of feminism , although he acknowledged that some values inoculated within childhood can never be fully abandoned , even those consciously rejected .
it also protects neighborhood property values and offers a unique opportunity for municipalities to obtain the significant financial benefits of high-quality , higher-density developments .
once the description of the interface is established , the advection equation of c is solved using geometrical techniques such as finding the flux of c between grid cells , or advecting the endpoints of interface using discrete values of fluid velocity .
arab world " to introduce an all encompassing arabic curriculum that would teach and cultivate arab values and culture " .
just as all behavior arises in sense impressions it must also terminate in sense impressions to realize its ends and attain its values .
likewise , a staccato or a fluent rhythm in music , a march , or a dance movement , have , even apart from their unconscious or intentional expressiveness , specific emotional values .
to destroy the harvest of these ideal values , because some weeds have grown up with them , by breaking down the dams and allowing the flood of truth-talk to burst in is the great psychological crime of our day .
the user can save the workspace with all values , programs , and execution status .
but supposing that a young man has acquired this sense of values , he may yet ruin himself before he comes to the fruition of his talent if he will not practise economy .
constructivism 's explanatory power ultimately fails , however , because it relies on moral action stemming from cosmopolitan values - that is , a sense of universal humanity or equal inherent worth .
california , connecticut , delaware , hawaii , iowa , maine , massachusetts , michigan , new york , oregon , and vermont have passed laws that establish deposits or refund values on beverage containers while other jurisdictions rely on recycling goals or landfill bans of recyclable materials .
in this way land-owners have long been sacrificed to dealers who now set the market-prices , just as the furniture-dealers in paris dictate values to appraisers .
however , it can be used for many other types of phenomena , including those that contain negative values .
a recent writer on the psychology of religion defines religion as man 's consciousness of his highest social values , and maintains that all religious beliefs are attempts to express this consciousness in whatever terms a given stage of civilisation makes natural and possible .
cartesian tree that does not add an element to the heap until smaller values on both sides of it have already been included in the sorted output .
a world loaded with dramatic values may thus arise in imagination ; terrible and delightful presences may chase one another across the void ; life will be a kind of music made by all the senses together .
the values of foreign commodities depend , not upon cost of production , but upon reciprocal demand and supply .
for he must first have the standard of values in human life ; he must have , too , the utter devotion to truth .
[ 18 ] he values wealth only as it supplies him with the means of serving others .
`` moltke values him highly and he must have done some excellent work . ''
the alteration of the bronze and several silver coins , and the need of readjusting all values and prices expressed in pence , formed the principal difficulties .
obtain books ; study food values and provide those foods which nourish the body , instead of spending time uselessly preparing dainties to tempt a jaded appetite .
often , however , there is the direct action of patriotic fervor , etc. , enhancing the values of government securities .
when all entries of the original tableau have been handled , their negated values are arranged in such a way that rows and columns are increasing .
this is a device to save space , because width values , for instance , are frequently duplicated .
it is difficult to understand or credit the increased imported values of cotton fabrics here represented , knowing , as we do , the decreased export to russia in our own tables of values and quantities .
the picture is hardly more than a sketch , but its justness of values conveys an impression of reality which is characteristic of the artist .
managerialism in political science is a set of beliefs , attitudes and values which support the view that management is the most essential and desirable element of good administration and government .
he could not distinguish their values : everything amused him .
michael brown is the current national senior partner ( elected 2012 ) on may 1 , 2014 , berrymans lace mawer and hbm sayers formally combined as blm , launching a rebrand complete with new corporate identity , visual palette , mission and values .
but for one who cares to look even superficially behind the scenes , it means an increased volume of belief in the triumph of the federal arms -- a belief that at once affected economic values , and was measured in terms of money .
one of the chief values of a thermometer is the service it has rendered to medicine .
ab-fubinaca is a drug that acts as a potent agonist for the cannabinoid receptors , with ki values of 0 .
let no man , henceforth , who values his life , talk of surrender .
the move did little to improve stallman 's growing reputation as an extremist , but it got the point across : commune members were expected to speak up for basic hacker values .
the list is not mathematically correct , but it will give you a good idea of the relative values , and is accurate enough for our purposes .
dollar index in that its numerical value is determined as a weighted average of the price of various currencies relative to the dollar , but different currencies are used and relative values are weighted differently .
hence the epicycles and eccentrics of coppernicus , which had to be adjusted in such a way that they necessarily involved incorrect values of the distances between the sun and earth , gave rise to corresponding errors in the observed places of the planets .
while critics , what few that would review a prc release , complained about the film 's lack of action , production values were noted to be somewhat higher than earlier releases .
what are the values of pressure , temperature and ice density over the rock of antarctica beneath the ice , assuming 2 .
the values of b projected into hyperspace give rise to x .
therefore , their numerical values in the atomic units are unity by definition .
for example , the orientation in space of a line , line segment , or vector can be specified with only two values , for example two direction cosines .
the software then adjusts the color balance to give that particular spot you clicked equal rgb values , and all the other values in the image are adjusted accordingly to correct the white balance .
she strongly believes that children need to be in the forefront of turning america toward conservative christian values .
and much of the pleasure which an appreciative listener derives from reading , as reading , is this indication on the part of the reader of a nice estimate of relative values .
and all his all-absorbing toil and thought as statesman and as president were to exalt in human estimation the values in men above all other gain .
the bvm custody more than 2,000 million dollars of its member values .
besides the advantage of allowing the recruitment of a priori information about parameter values , these models also facilitate inter-species transpositions or extrapolation from one mode of administration to another ( e .
at first rents were so high as apparently to justify an advance on true values ; but as the expanding process went on vendors ridiculed a capital value based on income-earning capacity .
p. 428 the values in the table are inconsistent .
m ) space , where n is the number of stored values and m is the maximum value in the domain .
cities also organize people , create norms , beliefs , and values .
the increase in land values by irrigation from 1890 to 1900 is estimated at $ 3,500,000 .
suppose we accept the values put on pdahau , kauca , and lacupda by stewart 's informant , i.e. , respectively 200 , 100 , and 80 .
manawhenua ( tribal authority ) over this area is held by ngāti kuri , one of 18 ngāi tahu papatipu rūnanga , and have had increased opportunities to develop a local community management strategy , incorporating socio-cultural values along with those of the biophysical .
`` let him who values his life keep away ! ''
leyburn points out that since the scotch-irish were never a `` minority , '' in the sense that their values differed radically from the norms of their areas of settlement , they never suffered the normlessness which durkheim calls anomie -- the absence of clear standards to follow .
the meaning of other possible return values is implementation-defined .
daly values when unmedicated than when medicated .
every man in this world attains his mode of judging values according to his character , which is formed partly by inherited tendencies , partly by education and is modified by his own reflections and experiences .
is it nothing to us that god himself values our love , that he says to us , `` my son , give me thine heart '' ?
they seem to reduce human behavior to a system of chemical and physical reactions , and rob life of all its spiritual values .
the revolution provided some work for jadin , as the demand for theatre and music that reflected the values of the revolution increased .
both durable and non-durable goods consumption declined as households moved from low to high leverage with the decline in property values experienced during the subprime mortgage crisis .
unmatchable values .
the precious gift he brought was a genial vulgarity , a hilarious cheapening of the values of normal life .
there may be an increase or decrease in the sum total of values .
the beauty of woman , which in the days of the past was regarded as sacred , can be made a means of pleasure , and thus drawn from the realm of values into the realm of sensuality .
node : true-hacker , next : tty , previous : tron , up : = t = true-hacker n. [ analogy with ` trufan ' from sf fandom ] one who exemplifies the primary values of hacker culture , esp .
all the values from the rules applicable to the article are added together to get a score .
`` my values are the same as yours , '' george pleaded .
romanticism undoubtedly led to a confusion of moral values .
the novel emphasizes the new values placed on mutual love at the end , when manson and evelyn are reunited .
the examples given represent reasonable values .
the man of noble character values , above all other things , these : truth , personal honour , moral courage , unselfishness , the voice of conscience .
in the first periods that we can make out by theory and deduction -- prehistoric periods that left no records -- the values sought appear to have been preponderantly sensuous and expressive .
the structure and practices of the education program are expressions of the discipline and , therefore , should be explicit reflections of the values and assumptions inherent in the statement of focus of the discipline .
non-physical values are very difficult to determine , and their intelligent treatment will require some well-defined procedure .
however i will not revert any longer because this makes an absolute mockery of discusssion and consensus as well as the core values of wikipedia .
very true , but by statistics with which i will not burden the reader , i find that prices of poultry products have risen more rapidly than the average rise in values of all commodities .
what he owned of the field was a diminishing fraction , long since negligible , were it not for the marvelous increase in all real-estate values , due to the growth of population in these parts and the activity of the country .
regarded as a whole , the volume of business has increased since the american occupation -- to what extent will be apparent on reference to the table of `` total import and export values '' at p. 639 .
it must first be noted that these degrees are numbered from one to nine , and that , of all the grammatical values defined , the conjunction , interjection and adverb are classed highest .
unlike cyrillic numerals , which inherited their numeric value from the corresponding greek letter ( see greek numerals ) , glagolitic letters were assigned values based on their native alphabetic order .
chapter vi mr. dainopoulos afterwards developed into an excellent diplomatist , his principal virtue being a knack of gauging personal values and extracting usefulness from apparently dry husks .
during nawaz 's tenure , the army took on the surprising role of becoming a protector of a free press and liberal values of criticism .
most of the barite actually mined comes from these residual deposits , which owe their present positions and values to katamorphic processes .
here is our real problem , if we would determine the social validity of values .
i could align these two values and strive to succeed at both simultaneously .
[ 130 ] the comparative values of some local anesthetics by h. c. hamilton , detroit , mich. , from the research laboratory of parke , davis & co. , j .
to establish those values , two centuries ago a bold generation of americans risked their property , their position , and life itself .
in virtually every neighborhood in chicago where negroes now live they were preceded by two or more distinct groups of occupants , and an earlier and often long-continued depreciation of property values is one of the explanations of their presence .
for instance , privileged to proceed according to the analytic method it is allowable to reconstruct the sequence of values in our ordinary system of enumeration so as to admit of the specification of a new value for say , the entire series of odd numbers .
they found that the values were not universal , but specific to each food product .
this alphabetic system operates on the additive principle in which the numeric values of the letters are added together to obtain the total .
cavour was a clear example of civic nationalism with a high consideration for values including freedom , tolerance , equality , and individual rights compatible with a sober nationalism .
only immigration can balance such a situation , simultaneously incorporating new values and lifestyles in the spanish society .
floor traders , who keenly study the markets and the general conditions of business , and acquire early information concerning the changes which affect the values of securities .
a teacher by profession , casona expressed a strong educational vocation , inspired by the ideals of the free institution of education , and his defense of progressive values in diverse cultural outreach projects such as pedagogical missions , created during the second spanish republic .
like most radio announcers on the am band in sydney , ball is politically conservative ; he claims to represent traditional australian values .
wages affect values , only if different in different employments ; `` non-competing groups . ''
conservation values relating to the marine park include the unique combination of tropical and temperature reef taxa , both flora and fauna .
my chief aim has been to shew , that _labor makes values , and wit exploitates and accumulates them_ ; and hence to deduce the conclusion that the unrestricted exploitation of so-called free society , is more oppressive to the laborer than domestic slavery .
more variety , and a broader range of values and colors , a chronicle of the transformations of changing light , spent over real minutes and hours with his model .
the program values learning by building and doing ; in contrast to traditional classrooms , dev bootcamp students work through a series of programming challenges , usually working in pairs or small groups , which culminates in a final group project .
the expression of spirituality , which grows out of work for justice and living gospel values , makes volunteers part of an active and prophetic church .
they briefly describe its culture and history and something of the values held by its people under headings like " business " , " language " , etc .
as the representative of the people and the guardian of democratic values , the state has the right and responsibility to help integrate cyberspace and conventional society .
study of single values and their sequence .
in disturbed areas local values often depart somewhat widely from what one would infer from the chart , and occasionally there are large differences between places only a few miles apart .
it is a residential neighborhood with relatively high property values , solely accessible by land via the macarthur causeway .
the author allows romantic and positive values to prevail , as the novel had been planned before the soviet and nazi invasions of his homeland .
substituting these values in equation ( 1 ) , page 1,053 , 6 tan φ = -- - = 2.4 2.5 referring to the table of natural sines and tangents on page 451 the corresponding angle is approximately 67° .
most namely , the first expression adds a number of values and then the following expressions find the percentages of each individual value in comparison to the sum of all values .
moreover , once smb and hml are defined , the corresponding coefficients bs and bv are determined by linear regressions and can take negative values as well as positive values .
an order of consciousness becomes established in which the notable event is emotional cognition of experience values as bringing in permanent emotion rather than an order of pleasure-pain inciting cognition with evanescent emotion .
she looked at things with a lighter logic and a kind of genius for the acceptance of superficial values .
usually this is either a comma or semi-colon delimited list or , if the individual values are known not to contain spaces , a common example of this would be for css class or identifier names .
psychical research is trying to prove that eternal values are temporal facts , which they can never be .
the members of this superior class are in the minority , but they are nevertheless the creators of values .
if i thought so -- -- '' '' dr. bretton knows these points perfectly , as you may be sure , m. de bassompierre , and values them as any gentleman would -- as _you_ would yourself , under the same circumstances -- but they are not his baits .
his attitude , even more than his words , conveyed his meaning to his hearers , and , in a flash , the real values of what they had loved , and now lost , fell into their rightful places .
the bonus drama cd was critiqued by gann as " fun for bonus content " if the listener understood japanese and as having high production values for a drama cd , but he noted that it did not add any real information to the story of the game .
a lawsuit filed by sba revealed avalon had little or no outside capital left due to divestiture by investors , losses in revenue or asset values or a combination of the three .
the chemistry of systems at room temperature is determined by the electronic properties , which is essentially fermionic , since room temperature thermal excitations have typical energies much higher than the hyperfine values .
the rate of interest and terms of issue offered were fair , considering existing market values ; but the american company agreed to make a concession and raise the issue price .
urban's idea of `` participation values '' is better expressed by cooley 's phrase , '' human nature values , '' while cooley 's excellent phrase , `` institutional values '' characterizes the more complex values in which classes and institutions are specially _weighted_ .
`` the gul-bibi values her good looks far too highly to conceal them .
this unification provided the focus needed for the basin , and more effective management of its watershed , ecological and recreational values .
the four values i got were 25 .
to arrive at a true estimate of the take one must disregard schumer's rough statement as to values for something more precise .
although you want to check you get the right answer for negative values .
it should train and refine senses , instincts , intellect , will and feeling ; giving a world-view based on real facts and real values and encouraging active correspondence therewith .
a in the infobox is top-left aligned while the other values are all central-central aligned .
nicholas kristof is an opinion journalist which writes of ephemeral values and social justice .
as the forces involved are described as real world equivalents rather than point values , conversion to different rulesets is relatively easy .
split the domain into two non-overlapping subdomains ω1 and ω2 with common boundary γ and let u1 and u2 be the values of u in each subdomain .
she is devoted to her traditions and values .
he does not view this as a flaw , but rather argues that the therapist should guide patients towards values that will improve their self-esteem .
he noted issues of compatibility between a society 's self-described " liberal " values and the values of their educational practice , or between a society 's educational practice and the wishes of its citizens .
i shall presently show , by striking examples , that the idea of the measure or proportion of values , theoretically necessary , is constantly realized in every-day life .
in explanation of this blindness it should be said , first that time is required to give the proper perspective to literary values , and secondly that there is an absence of critical documents from the elizabethan period .
however , certain operations on null can return values if the value of null is not relevant to the outcome of the operation .
government is not the source of these values , but government should never undermine them .
reasonable property values and welcoming neighbors have made smallwood an attractive summer destination for those looking to escape from the fast pace of new york city .
vfpclassps , vfpclasspd test types of packed single and double precision floating point values .
this is a complete set of the values currently supported .
baird worries that aipac members and supporters believe that they 're " supporting israel " when they are " actually backing policies " such as the killing of civilians in gaza , " that are antithetical to its highest values and , ultimately , destructive for the country .
the company symbol needs to be adaptable to a changing society while standing firmly as a set of values .
`` worry about my values , as you would say .
through the music of madness , writer tim firth explores the themes of love , family values , growing up , responsibility and dealing with losing the people that shape us .
for example , if a production run has generated 200 units , the total cost can be derived by taking the equation below and applying it 200 times ( for units 1 to 200 ) and then summing the 200 values .
see brainstorm sublimation subordinate substance abuse synapses synthesis teacher teacher leadership style teamwork leadership style ten commandments thinking skill triune brain two wrongs make a right fallacies unattached use of force values work ethic zen buddhism
the creator of slave-morality was one who , out of the poverty of his soul , transfigured all he saw and heard , and declared it smaller , meaner , and less beautiful than it appeared to the creator of the master values .
initially tsukasa shows no respect for any values or other people , but as he engages in relationships , he begins to gradually change , learning to care about others and acquiring the strength to face the reality of his life .
the values of ipad and opad are not critical to the security of the algorithm , but were defined in such a way to have a large hamming distance from each other and so the inner and outer keys will have fewer bits in common .
algebra can not exist without values , nor thought without feelings .
some drawings call out dimensions with parameter names ( that is , variables , such a " a " , " b " , " c " ) , then tabulate rows of parameter values for each part number .
however , the perfect lens would require significantly different values for permittivity , permeability , and spatial periodicity than the demonstrated negative refractive sample .
without a key that is directly or indirectly associated with a value , or collection of values in a structure , the values become meaningless and cease to be data .
land values had climbed and climbed , and had gone so high until only the moneyed could even reckon to own land .
in 1901 the quantities and values were respectively -- currants , 70,402 cwt. , £75,308 ; gooseberries , 21,735 cwt. , £11,420 ; strawberries , 38,604 cwt. , £51,290 .
the warrant gravely charged the defendant with stealing or causing to be stolen from the plaintiff , on the night of the twenty-fourth of december last past , a pair of boots and a pair of breeches , whose respective values were duly set forth .
the following program reads in vector a of 10 values , then forms the squares of those values , and finally prints those values .
if a space can be stratified with all strata of even dimension ( for example , any complex variety ) then the intersection homology groups are independent of the values of the perversity on odd integers , so the upper and lower middle perversities are equivalent .
no waste land values were considered in this district .
this enabled haitians to keep control over the cultural values their children received .
the country day school movement shared many values with the arts and crafts movement .
these values never produce ambiguous combinations ; each sum represents a specific set of permissions .
kellogg was able to win support for her plans for the iroquois from diverse communities because her activities emphasized solidarity with traditionalist policies , culture and values .
in this game , the cards of the discard pile ( which is known as the " pozo " ) are overlapped so that all their values are visible .
typical values for sled modules are for the bw between 5 nm and 100 nm with central wavelengths covering the range between 400 nm and 1700 nm .
their relative values are now exactly reversed in our estimation .
cambridge university press , 2005 ) , this book demonstrates that people 's basic values and beliefs are changing , in ways that affect their political , sexual , economic , and religious behavior .
i ceased to believe in zeppelins ; earth , material things slid away , in the cloud-veiled moonlight values became distorted ; i felt like a spectator at a play , but a play where only shadows act behind a dim , semi-transparent screen .
on the other hand , with a changed set of legal and moral values , we may have men of social influence and power striving constantly to increase the incomes and relieve the sufferings of the poor and helpless .
we may call it the position of the _maximum_ ordinate ; or that of the _centre_ of the curve ; or ( as will be seen hereafter ) the point to which the arithmetical average of all the different values of the variable magnitude directs us .
but what should most excite a mutual flame , your rural cares and pleasures are the same : 95 to him your orchards ' early fruits are due , ( a pleasing off'ring when 't is made by you ; ) he values these ; but yet , alas !
i ordered this kit from cenco physics so i assume all of the values are correct .
unless the liberal and progressive values of zionism are restored and palestinian rights to self-determination within a framework of peaceful coexistence are recognised , israel 's search for peace is doomed to failure .
many of the values given to the characters as well as many of their ideographic meanings are semitic .
mr. tucker stood watching them for some time , and then , with a glance in the direction of the `` george , '' where he had left a very small portmanteau , he did a hasty sum in comparative values and made his way to the railway-station .
were this a guidebook i might inundate you with figures of population , bank clearings , and land values , all of them risen and still rising in bounds almost beyond belief .
the binomial theorem operates irrespective of the values substituted for its symbols .
v. reduction of the struve-peters precessions to the adopted values .
species for which extracts were prepared and the protein values of the extracts are listed in table 1 .
critics have noted that his work tends to reject contemporary art 's values , and instead harkens back to old masters such as rembrandt and caravaggio .
except sources , zero values are not allowed .
changes in the relative values of the australian dollar and japanese yen made it financially impractical to continue with the well-regarded nissan engine of the vl .
now , it so happens that all kinds of astronomical observations for the determination of latitude lead to values based on the rotation axis of the earth , and not on its axis of figure .
the children investigate their family history and values , heroes and role models , their own beliefs , and complete a major project on any topic of jewish learning they want to explore in depth .
the mine had been gutted of every pound of ore that it would pay to sack and ship , and unless something was done to locate the lost ore body and give some guarantee of future values , well , the paymaster would have to shut down .
it is the work of a loving and powerful artist , who could simplify the human frame , and express stenographically , so to speak , the essential features of the people he represented , because he knew the essential features to which their values aspired .
the number of the several values of these stamps issued , without the _grille_ is approximated as follows : it being not quite certain whether a few with the grille were not issued prior to the dates to which the enumeration is made .
that all intermediate values are possible ; so , in the inverse process of determining the probable position of the original from the known value of two or more errors , we assume that that position is capable of falling at any point whatever between certain limits .
so the moral is that you cannot always switch the order of taking limiting values .
the values for current and backup lbas of the primary header should be the second sector of the disk ( lba 1 ) and the last sector of the disk , respectively .
the pessimist always has wit , for wit reveals itself in the knowledge of values .
it is an architectural structure combining original eastern design and values , along with modern elements like earthquake proof design for an earthquake zone .
hence the possibility of absolutely different moral values attaching to pleasures , according to the type or aspect of character which they express .
in summarizing general estimates and counts we may discard the very high values submitted by wozencraft , johnston , and sutter on the grounds that they were either mere guesses or applied to an earlier period than that which we are considering .
+exchange tables of sterling and indian rupee currency+ , upon a new and extended system , embracing values from one farthing to one hundred thousand pounds , and at rates progressing , in sixteenths of a penny , from 1_s._ 9_d._ to 2_s._ 3_d._ per rupee .
in 1929 they floated the first phase municipal bond to raise 3,000,000 chinese yuan based on marketable land values of between 200 and 600 yuan per chinese acre .
this would indicate that rowland's corrected values should , if anything , be lowered .
timeout values and validity information is contained within the messages conveying information allowing for differing timer values to be used at differing nodes .
they are fighting for moral values , and the french politician has overruled the french soldier and compelled him to accept battle on unfavorable ground for this same moral value , but against his military judgment .
general aspect : the values that have been highest hitherto have been a special instance of the will to power ; morality itself is a particular instance of _immorality._ *** why the antagonistic values always succumbed .
important as is the possession of wealth and influence it seems to be the psychic values that ultimately determine the individual 's place in american society .
he who values peace of mind can never be far enough from thee ! ''
at such times bill explained glibly enough that no pay dump carried steady values , and that an inexperienced sampler was apt to get `` skunked '' under the best of circumstances .
save the primary conversion , and then copy-paste the values from the plain read page into edit-page .
but we already have our own values , and we should develop and refine them , not subvert them .
if it had nutritional values and was safe to eat , it might be more commonly grown or sold for profit .
however , the new title architectural design values is a valid topic , as well as being a more accurate reflection of the content .
pizza describes paganistan as having its own history , customs , culture , values and identity .
there was no money but james 's copper trash , bearing high nominal values .
table 54 gives the ratio of barometric readings of various altitudes to sea level , values for the square of this ratio and values of the two-fifths power of this ratio .
now we need to calculate two values from this data , that is the mean and standard deviation .
for each district a mean was formed of the observed values of each element , and the mean was assigned to an imaginary central station , whose geographical co-ordinates represented the mean of the geographical co-ordinates of the actual stations .
however , note that depending on the language and the function , nans can silently be removed in expressions that would give a constant result for all other floating-point values e .
the higher values of these stamps ( 30 and 50 cents ) are still scarce , as many post-offices had large stocks of the old issue , or of the lower values ( 1 , 2 , 3 , 5 , and 10 ) of the current issue .
the problem is to define situations in such ways as to produce attitudes which direct the action exclusively toward fields yielding positive social values .
in a typical implementation , non-java mode converts denormal values to zero but java mode traps into an emulator when the processor encounters such a value .
he is a colour theorist , and with his knowledge of values he can gauge the true beauty of white light . ''
a byte can represent 256 ( 28 ) distinct values , such as the integers 0 to 255 , or -128 to 127 .
the user can define profiles for all account types to set default values .
the theory of the measure or proportionality of values is , let it be noticed , the theory of equality itself .
this is an exercise in three values ( page 83 ) using color instead of neutral gray .
one-nation conservatism ( also known as one-nationism , or tory democracy ) is a form of british political conservatism that views society as organic and values paternalism and pragmatism .
hastings conducts seminar-style meetings to review developments in science and policy , frame legal and social issues , and in-depth critical reflection on fundamental principles and values .
=helps.= -- there are , however , several things which you can use to help you in training your eye to distinguish values .
small coal such as buckwheat and pea contain a much higher percentage of moisture than given in the table , running from 5 % to 10 % higher than the given values .
they will declare one of their companions to be 'in love ' if his fancy is occupied by the image of a single person about whom all the new-found values gather , and without whom his solitude is an eternal melancholy .
in the bisbee deposits large values were found in the weathered zone , and secondary sulphide enrichment below this zone is also important .
this philosophy held that rural lifestyles espoused certain moral values which were a positive influence on urbanites .
in negotiating this church loan with your clients , you can offer the same great values as a primary security .
never has woman more perfectly accomplished the important task of adjusting culture values .
hight resolution and good quality depiction of a beautiful species of butterfly , comparing favourably with the existing photos and adding values to the articles .
it is usually advisable , therefore , to call in an appraiser , familiar with the line of business involved , to set the values of the assets on the basis of a going business and on forced sale .
parties inopinées et non values , cy deux millions cent sept mil cinq cens livres sept sols six deniers .
just as the engineer must know the structure and parts of his engine , or the architect the nature and relative values of material as well as the principles of design , so must the would-be singer understand the easily injured structure and delicate functions of voice mechanism .
the voc destruction efficiency increased initially with the specific energy , but remained at values of the specific energy that are compound-dependent .
madrid invited some of her teacher friends to operate the fledgling learning center , teaching basic skills such as writing , speaking , mathematics and values .
`` do you mean to say , arthur , '' asked mrs. carmichael , `` that your department can take away cecile 's property in that cavalier fashion , and without any regard to the rise in values ? ''
we have seen , however , that the results of observations by seven distinct methods give values ranging only between 92,250,000 miles and 92,850,000 miles , -- the six best methods giving values ranging only between 92,250,000 miles and about 92,480,000 miles .
it is the very nature of religion to condemn this falling short of loyalty to the finer values of life .
humanism begins with the general abstract assumption that all which men can know , or need to know , are `` natural '' and human values ; that they have no means of getting outside the inexorable circle of their own experience .
azerbaijani folk music ( azərbaycan xalq musiqisi ) combines the distinct cultural values of all civilisations that have lived in azerbaijan and the past territories in europe and asia .
these have corresponding values of .
he embraced the liberal economic values in saudi arabia following the work of the egyptian economic leader talaat pasha harb .
`` i have never even seen the man , '' replied duthil , `` but from what i have heard , he is a regular buccaneer of the old type , who values human life not one hair .
the biggest irony here is that the internet can actually promote family values and strengthen real neighborhoods .
the figures for an adjoining county were often very high , and village values were put up to substantially full value .
in order to improve these values pwm can be used instead of the other methods .
søren kierkegaard spoke about a " leap " , arguing that life is full of absurdity , and one must make his and her own values in an indifferent world .
[ 112 ] i do not deny that if the traders used the dodo-bones as counters , agreeing that such dodo-bones should represent some other commodity chosen as a standard of values , that the dodo-bones would circulate .
when assessed upon a chi-square distribution , nonsignificant chi-square values indicate very little unexplained variance and thus , good model fit .
language , tradition and belief are values of the home country , without them we will perish , our small nation will die .
an integer x that is a fermat pseudoprime to all values of a that are coprime to x is called a carmichael number .
but , bless you dear urban soul , what do _you_ know about the relative values of flowers ?
it was particularly difficult for decision makers to work through the trade-offs between costs and intangible benefits , especially for long-term investments by commercial organizations , and for governments and non-profit organizations who are primarily concerned with intangible values without wasting limited funds .
fluctuations in values would cease .
all theories respecting outlays , values , results , sink into utter insignificance beside this question .
german literature was also taught so that the children would understand that " despite all that had happened , human values had not changed and that it was worth nurturing the cultural foundations of the children even though they were separated from their homeland .
by doing this , any data points from the n samples that lie outside this probability band can be considered to be outliers , removed from the data set , and a new mean and standard deviation based on the remaining values and new sample size can be calculated .
professor toy designed a modern nave while retaining the ambience and architectural values of the older chancel .
in mathematics , the cauchy principal value , named after augustin louis cauchy , is a method for assigning values to certain improper integrals which would otherwise be undefined .
the read procedure inputs numbers and truth values .
this is something new i 've noticed recently - blank named and unnamed parameters seem to be overriding default values .
it is useful as a device for measuring changes in the value of money , on the assumption that changes in the values of goods neutralize one another .
the candidates b and e , the values of whose votes exceed the quota , are declared elected .
if we substitute general symbols in place of the concrete values , we may say that _x_ is equal to one hundred times the lesser measurement ( _m_ ) divided by the greater measurement ( _m_ ) .
essentially , this was a nationalist croatian movement that affirmed croatian values based on catholicism blended with historical and cultural traditions which had been generally suppressed in communist yugoslavia .
* * * * * rilke has lived deeply ; he has absorbed into his artistic and spiritual consciousness many of the supreme values of our time .
this alphabetic system operates on the additive principle in which the numeric values of the letters are added together to form the total .
never you say a thing like that to a man , not if he values what he is .
some day when we , who now feel so keenly the injustice of it all , are fathers and mothers , let us put the question then to ourselves : “ why this waste of precious ointment on one who values it not ?
to create a database with all the values of the demographic statistics .
the conscription of wealth might well begin with placing all articles of food and clothing on the free list and levying a direct tax on all land values .
in order to let the scheme work , the absolute values of all eigenvalues of m must be larger than one .
further to this , the values of k1-5 are unsubstantiated and the suggested multiplicative relationship has no sufficient theoretical or empirical evidence for justification purposes .
our values are _interpreted into the heart_ of things .
official and signage colours , including the national colours of canada , are specified in technical specification t-145 as hexadecimal triplets , rgb values , cmyk colors , and pantone color matching system .
he whom they call saviour put them in fetters : -- in fetters of false values and fatuous words !
elevated transaminases that persist less than six months are termed ' acute ' in nature , and those values that persist for six months or more are termed ' chronic ' in nature .
divide each of the found values by the smallest of these values ( 2 .
it would be very delightful , and certainly very useful , if , besides this friendliness in nature , you could learn some of the special values of nature , as shown by science .
the party mostly campaigned on a family values platform , and strongly opposed legislative changes such as the creation of same-sex civil unions and the legalisation of prostitution .
therefore , as a man values his efficiency in the service of man , he will not _make himself to be heard in the street_ .
practical suggestions regarding food values and the proper selection of a nutritious and economical diet .
tabular values and setting numbers for odontograph , i , 51 .
as libertarians , we seek a world of liberty ; a world in which all individuals are sovereign over their own lives and no one is forced to sacrifice his or her values for the benefit of others .
shelby steele wrote in the content of our character that what he identified as middle-class black values are falsely viewed by the majority of blacks as " white , " while they are colorblind .
a separate article on the values for each country would , just as a separate article for the vote in each electoral unit of a general election .
but spheres do so variously from society to society according to the relative influence of other powers and spheres and the dominant values and norms present in the wider ethos .
the reason is that the relative elongation of the several parts , or individual bones , has not proceeded equally or proportionately in all cases ; in other words , that the equations for _x_ will not suffice without some simultaneous modification of the values of _y_ ( fig .
sense and respond has been used in control theory for several decades , primarily in closed systems such as refineries where comparisons are made between measurements and desired values , and system settings are adjusted to narrow the gap between the two .
the shelf-life values were extrapolated to nasa 's 65 thermostabilized items ( figure 2 ) .
its aim was to reinforce " core values " such as respect and responsibility , and empowered teachers to say that some behaviours were just plain wrong , and would not be tolerated .
however , approximation formula ( 30c ) above , which yields values correct to within an absolute mathematical accuracy of better 0 .
surely the lord of true values will not grudge it to her .
similar to the hippocratic oath , it is a statement of professional values and ethics .
it seems to be natural to man to suffer from periods of discouragement and depression which keep him from devoting himself too persistently to lines of work that may be insignificant and make him take cognizance of the real values of what he is doing .
for comparison , the corresponding values for crystalline diamond are 1161 , 1174 and 1123 gpa .
in this , as in general appearance , hackerdom semi-consciously maintains ` counterculture ' values .
he couldn't calculate market values .
two " lookup tables " ( similar to the one above ) and its carbon intensity values are part of the regulation , one for gasoline and another for diesel .
he defined these individuals as traditionalist conservatives who believed in environmental conservation , frugal living , and the preservation of traditional family values .
education had ended for all three , and only beyond some remoter horizon could its values be fixed or renewed .
clusters of countries reflect their shared values and not geographical closeness .
as usual with slang , the special vocabulary of hackers helps hold their culture together -- it helps hackers recognize each other 's places in the community and expresses shared values and experiences .
though the school changed with the times over the years , there was still a strong sense of tradition and an emphasis on upholding high educational and moral values .
army life developed a new series of moral values and moral reactions .
a being without any conscious end or goal , i.e. , without an ideal , would have no sense of worth , no spiritual values .
this article was the last attempt of this period to reconcile the schools with the values of the cuban revolution .
in the end of the segment of the episode parodying est , mork wins out over the ellsworth philosophy by instead calling to mind universal humanistic moral values .
next let us think of the result of mixing different values in opposite hues ; as , for instance , yr7 and b3 ( fig .
lorde criticised feminists of the 1960s , from the national organization for women to betty friedan 's the feminine mystique , for focusing on the particular experiences and values of white middle-class women .
in 2007 , he worked as a contract researcher for the government of canada studying aboriginal values and ethics , morals and logic in relation to police work and peacekeeping and consensus government .
he values more his gold , than whatever apelles or phidias have invented !
i 'll try to determined values for this .
the data for each cycle of each unit included the unit id , cycle index , 3 values for the operational settings and 21 values for 21 sensor measurements .
this celebrated question -- which dramatizes the zen concept of an original nature in every person that precedes and transcends artificial values such as good and evil -- caused the pursuer to be enlightened on the spot .
it is finally the only value , for all other so-called values borrow their value from persons .
god is a human invention , constructed in ancient human cultures which had very different values than modern democracies .
though , the restored text may not contain the same number of words as original text nevertheless the values should be comparable .
the increasing importance of attitudes and values in affluent modern societies , which gives everyone the freedom to choose their lifestyle .
man craves other values in life than the purely scientific .
the hebrew numeric system operates on the additive principle in which the numeric values of the letters are added together to form the total .
baker. -- the ordinary foreign coins are so little collected in this country that no values can be obtained .
society is the _process_ of associating in such ways that experiences , ideas , emotions , values are transmitted and made common .
romic , r [ =o ] 'mik , _n._ a phonetic notation devised by henry sweet , based upon the original _roman_ values of the letters , supplemented by turned and ligatured letters and diagraphs -- in part a recasting of ellis 's glossic .
this was altogether a coasting trip by boats , and led to much information about the high values of the rich alluvial lands fringing the banks of the rivers which run into the sea on the east coast of the northern part of queensland .
but how are we to get a real scale of values to oppose to an indiscriminate sympathy ?
young envisioned a school that could instill in its students values based on judeo-christian principles and traditions .
when a generator terminates , an internal exception is raised which indicates to any calling context that there are no more values .
the approximate london market values of goat-skins are : -- east indian , 4-15_d._ a lb .
if we did not use logarithmic values to describe audio levels , the numerical changes would be so vast and large it would make them near impossible to understand and work with .
`` thorold is too big and strong for these petty feelings ; he values joa's peace of mind far too much to disturb it by paltry jealousy .
take the home values for example , because they get the sold data ( what homes in the same neighborhood sold for ) from public records not the local mls their numbers can be behind the market trends .
in other words , these genes try to resolve the " push-pull " between males and females over trait values for optimal phenotype .
| cross-overs.| cross-over | | | | | values .
certain values she had fostered had tumbled about and had to be put in order .
the precursors of the impressionists , on the other hand , succeeded in painting absolute values , confining themselves to a very limited gamut ; for this reason the first landscapes of the school were all gray-green , dull , cloudy .
y has the sound values or in the scandinavian languages and in german .
and western values .
my new freedom of spirit gave me courage to re-examine the emotional and æesthetic values of my environment .
this phenomenon can be accompanied by the so-called hidden curriculum in schools , where certain values are reinforced .
the values attached show very clearly the difference in quality .
encrypted variables ensure that values are not inadvertently disclosed through e .
the capacities of its high roads , its railways , its great rivers , with their commercial and strategic values and relations are perfectly ascertained ; and the knowledge , it is not too much to say , is the common property of all important governments .
this is the typical case in ethical values , where the presuppositions , especially in ethical crises , involve the whole personality .
i also need to find the range of values for z for which each series converges .
beliefs , values , goals , commitments , and physical safety are all at stake ( foulton , 1982 ) .
he fearlessly stood up to the threats of extremists , and lost his life in defense of moderation and tolerance , values shared by most pakistani citizens .
this template lists css list-style-type values along with a short sample and a table that shows browser support .
the standard kind of interpretation in this setting is a function that maps each propositional symbol to one of the truth values true and false .
today these values are particularly valid when applied to a class of artifacts that changed slowly and have as their prime characteristics anonymity of maker and date .
sociologist dennis gilbert uses a list of values identified by melvin kohn to be typical of the professional middle and working class .
these letters exchanged thoughts and ideas , painting techniques of composition , values , lighting , painting styles and pricing until the death of charles in france in 1914 .
often they function as paid teachers responsible for religious education classes held in mosques where children learn basic moral values and correct ritual practices .
it confesses the principle that there are neither truths nor values that endure ; _plus ultra ! _ always new ideas !
women 's perspectives and values for the environment are somewhat different from men 's .
the position of the north end of the axis of this uniform magnetization and the values of m/r^3 , derived from the more important determinations of the gaussian constants , are given in table xlv .
our values are like calls within the calls .
`` you _must_ , gard , you _must_ stay '' -- struggling to keep the white face from going down in the suck of an undertow , drawn under by some blind power that knew no measures of values or who loved and remembered and who forgot .
when the ground of that experience and those ideals is disclosed by science , nothing of any value is lost ; it only remains to accustom ourselves to a new vocabulary and to shift somewhat the associations of those values which life contains or pursues .
in a time when beliefs are held lightly , with tricky words tearing at old values , they have recovered the ancient faiths of the race .
these are drawings _in values_ , or made for values ; that is to say , the relative force of darkness or of light is carefully preserved .
first , i am opting to ignore the mos for this one , as not every one knows guam and other places are us territories and because the values are inflated .
waste , peculation , folly and every form of misgovernment followed ; public credit was destroyed , property values fell ; there were ten wretched years of violence , scandals and shame , at the end of which negro suffrage had disappeared , abandoned even by its strongest supporters .
along with the duties of an ordinary councilperson , it is the provost 's duty to promote the values of the council , provide an example to others and enhance the reputation of the council and fife .
de quincey 's essay , `` on murder considered as one of the fine arts , '' owes its reputation for humour to the same kind of unexpectedness in its table of values .
the structural total weights differed from the nominal values ; for example r-142 was allowed to be loaded up to 26 tonnes total weight in off-road use .
potter coined the term bioethics to describe a new philosophy that sought to integrate biology , ecology , medicine , and human values .
but we are nearer the truth when we see how that faith and prayer discover and secure the eternal values of fleeting days .
the series of changes included extreme proportional values of 0.714 and 1.769 in duration of the two intervals .
but under gaap requirements , a firm must show the fair values ( which usually approximates market value ) of some types of assets such as financial instruments that are held for sale rather than at their original cost .
he led the youth association movement , which above all wanted to defend the values of rural life and foster temperance and healthy living , a desire the movement held in common with the coeval christian revivalist and labor movements .
for official purposes some of the values had the word `` service '' printed upon them .
reason with one-track-mind agenda pushers while respecting their values .
since this equilibrium among values holds , then any object of value may be used to _measure_ the value of any other .
i believe we are in agreement that the humanities illuminate the values underlying important personal , social , and national questions raised in our society by its multiple links to and increasing dependence on technology , and by the diverse heritage of our many regions and ethnic groups .
the more they were cut off from their accidental foothold in the world of fact , the more clearly could they manifest their essence as expressions of the world of values .
it seeks to promote european values , and to contribute to european citizens ' better understanding of the european union as a cultural entity .
bliss institute of applied politics established in 1986 at the university of akron to promote citizen knowledge and participation in the political process , values in which bliss strongly believed .
the simple tombstone style evoked relations between literacy and values such as simplicity , honesty , the permanence of the idea , the dominance of reason .
patient decision aids , which may include leaflets , video or audio tapes , or interactive media , supplement the patient-physician relationship and assist patients in making medical decisions that most closely aligns with their values and preferences .
for help finding correct values for the first and third parameter , see find your time zone and utc offset below .
there was no insistent colour , to detract from the rich subdued values of this and other fine pieces of furniture .
morality , that is to say those moral codes which are observed and recognized , consists of the imposition of values ; but the meaning and the virtue of those values lie in the policy which will produce desired results .
since the equation being studied is a first-order equation , the initial conditions are the initial x and y values .
[ 117 ] mediæval coinages varied to such an extreme extent that it is almost impossible to make correct general statements about their modern values .
the purpose of the methodology is to identify spam documents with artificially inflated pagerank values .
his responses grow intelligent , or gain meaning , simply because he lives and acts in a medium of accepted meanings and values .
sagesse high school is a catholic , anglophone , co-educational day and boarding school that educates and motivates students from diverse backgrounds to become lifelong learners and responsible citizens with strong ethical values .
both hypochlorite and pentachlorophenol have reduced effectiveness at ph values greater than 8 .
a scale of white , black and three grays ( a ) will be best for beginning , to be followed by a scale of seven values ( b ) .
intermediary values , 13 .
he is the first explicitly to have reduplicated the world , to have set existences over against values , to have made them dependent upon values , to have assigned absolute reality to the compensatory ideals , and to have identified philosophy with preoccupation with these ideals .
these he writes r /1 , r /5 , r /9 , seeing that this describes the chromas of red , but leaves out its values .
the change of the cryohydric point with the pressure is represented by the line be ; the actual values have not been determined , but the curve must slope towards the pressure axis because fusion is accompanied by diminution of volume , as in the case of pure ice .
that is to say , in the space of thirteen years the increase of agricultural values in france—annual values—was no less than forty per cent. , or three per cent .
it is doubtful whether so clumsy a contrivance as metallic currencies , of intrinsic values corresponding with their titles , can survive at all ; but of course everything will be computed in terms of some currency or other -- perhaps of an obsolete currency .
=lucia mead priest= : i do not feel competent to suggest in this , but i will venture to state what i feel is a sad lack in our current literature -- it is a loss in moral values .
until comparatively recent years but little was known of the relative values of the different varieties of rock as road material , and good results were obtained more by chance and general observation than through any special knowledge of the subject .
in all , care has been taken to make the numerals distinct ; and it is as well that this has been done , as two of the values assimilate considerably in shade .
= tan ( 180° - [ psi ] _ { 0 } ) / cos z_ { 0 } substituting values of [ psi ] _ { 0 } found on the form ( figure 18 ) : tan [ theta ] _ { npt . }
in general , these coefficients are determined by a regression on experimentally obtained values of volume v as a function of the pressure p .
the bark of morinda produces a brownish-purplish dye for batik-making , while its fruit have medicinal values .
each player attempts to answer as many questions correctly as possible ( " offense " ) and assigns point values to each question ( " defense " ) .
suppose that wages were double , would the values of commodities be affected ?
for the first time , i am looking on life with a middle-aged estimating of values , -- and to-night is like a valedictory to a youth that has fled .
and he has the cash and an inexact sense of values .
2d , comparisons of the estimated values , and selling prices of a number of fertilizers will generally indicate fairly which is the best for the money .
it is a place of fictitious values .
common misunderstandings of conservatives by conservatives are that " conservatism [ and nothing else ] is for traditional values " , and that " conservatism is just what the bible tells us .
_/ 1 t this equation defines log x for positive values of x ; if x < = 0 the formula ceases to have any meaning .
power sum elfext ( pselfext ) power sum elfext ( pselfext ) is the sum of fext values from 3 wire pairs as they affect the other wire pair , minus the insertion loss of the channel .
notice how the full numeric values of the kerning constants are written out each time they appear , instead of being stored once and referred to by a much smaller index .
when encountered , the condition for a branch is evaluated as best possible given the precision of the abstract values bound to variables in the condition .
first recorded in latin verse by avianus , the tale is one that educators recommend for teaching young children about moral values .
the table of comparative values given , exhibits this quite plainly .
sometimes it is wiser to change an unsatisfactory situation or to attempt to change your attitudes , values , or behavior { 217 } than it is to learn skills so that you can keep doing the same stressful and perhaps unsatisfying thing day after day .
she had an entirely different code of values , which were not pecuniary .
one could probably make a case for n sides , for quite a few values of n .
it must be possible to encode and decode all the values which can be generated by the source .
the minimum consumption values in gallons per hour per brake horsepower for 80 per cent alcohol is approximately 17.5 per cent greater than for the denatured alcohol used , or for gasoline .
the church bases its values on prosperity theology .
professor fortescue observed that whatever might be said about their own little band , it was a strange fact that bodies of human beings were able to produce , by union , a condition far above or far below the average of their separate values .
until recently our knowledge of this subject was empirical and inaccurate ; as the result of scientific work , however , carried out during the past few years in different parts of the world , quantitative and comparative figures of antiscorbutic food values have been evolved .
like hewett , he was strongly influenced by the oxford movement and sought to establish a new school to teach its values .
syama prasad mookerjee , who served as its president in 1944 and joined the jawaharlal nehru cabinet after independence , was a hindu traditionalist politician who wanted to uphold the hindu values but not necessarily to the exclusion of other communities .
=last quotations= : -- the latest information on stock values given out before the stock exchange closes .
science values them greatly as specimens of _the only tangible_ substances we have from remote and inaccessible regions of the universe .
btw , i changed the colour coding , as the values on the left and right axis were hard to distinguish from the mach values .
this value does not relate to price in a simple manner , and the difficulty of the conversion of the mass of values into the actual prices is known as the transformation problem .
the objection to having two spade values is purely theoretical , as players are not in the least embarrassed thereby , nor is the number of declarations at present a part of the game cumbersome or confusing .
because protein structures are composed of amino acids whose side chains are linked by a common protein backbone , a number of different possible subsets of the atoms that make up a protein macromolecule can be used in producing a structural alignment and calculating the corresponding rmsd values .
as a result , commercially used examples of both values are scarce .
pcnom , my own proposed term for wanting to delete an article about someone or something that does not conform to the conventional socially liberal values .
the values of the variables remain the same .
of the unseen but higher values in culture , in knowledge , in the spread of civilization , and in greater joy of living for millions of people , there are even greater riches .
if she reciprocates , she comes to the window after a decent interval , the length of which is according to how highly she values herself , and smiles on him .
he saw his farm going up in price through the general appreciation of land values , and he sold a bit now and again and increased his herds ; or he might receive a large sum for the option on the minerals under the soil .
beginning in 1929 , general mills products contained box top coupons , known as betty crocker coupons , with varying point values , which were redeemable for discounts on a variety of housewares products featured in the widely distributed betty crocker catalog .
but when britain values herself as affording us protection , we desire it may be considered , that we have followed _her_ in all _her_ wars , and joined with her at our own expence against all she thought fit to quarrel with .
there are two examples of a company report affecting share values , which from what i can see was reported explicitly in the usa today only once .
wishing to give me a lesson in values one day as he was painting , he turned his palette over and painted a complete little scheme of a picture on the back of it , suggested by the subject before us as we looked out of the studio window .
after a while , the ship had reduced its speed and altitude to reasonable values .
`` i shall assuredly say what i think if he questions me , '' beric said quietly ; `` but if he values me as a guard , he will scarce question me when he knows that i should express an opinion contrary to his own . ''
the intermediate values obtained by the successive additions are different according as we work from the left or from the right , being £9 , 5s .
each of the six pairs of columns contain , side by side , the observed and calculated values of one of the six series , the data on which the calculations were made being also entered at the top .
they do not express at all his real tastes and his real appreciation of values .
i would especially like to be able to control the number of values returned .
throughout the days of his youth his industry was devoted entirely to mastering the difficult technique of his work , until foreshortening , perspective , correct anatomy , relative values , light , shadow , and relief , were his subjects rather than his masters .
though in her stories sarojini deals with the social issues but she is basically a writer of individual values .
good values are those for which we have good reasons , viz .
writer alan brennert attempted to end their saga in a 1982 issue of the brave and the bold where 12 years later hank and don hall , then adults , are trying to cope with their 1960s values in the 1980s .
the divisive curriculum combined with active church involvement in educational affairs contributed to the transference of conflicting ethnic values through the generations .
post-holocaust sympathy , 2 ) shared political values , 3 ) israel 's underdog image , 4 ) common cultural linkages , and 5 ) " the role of the jewish community in american politics .
addressing the ceremony held upon the start of the matches , erkut onart , the turkish consul general in the netherlands , said that he believed the friendship between the turkish society and the european countries is intensified when these kinds of cultural values are brought to europe .
john smith 's maxim that those who did n't work didn't eat was perhaps the first blow to the european values that ranked language and culture along with social status and privilege .
then , too , so long as labor 's wits had not been sharpened , so long as the laborer had not learned the relative values of things , perhaps he was content .
nevertheless , the values which people uphold often clash , and how " consistency " should be interpreted may be in dispute .
estimated values are indicated by an asterisk .
the absolute values of units of two goods , thus explained , causally fix the exchange ratio between the goods .
mandaue city college provides students equal opportunity to develop competencies ( knowledge , attitudes , skills and values ) needed to enter and succeed in post-secondary training as well as higher education technology-based and professional programs and to contribute to national development .
they are unrepresentative of soviet values in that their focus is more on their music than their jobs .
chapter iv values [ side note : _the color scheme_ ] after the subject has been mapped out in pencil , and before beginning the pen work , we have to consider and determine the proper disposition of the color .
yet we can not organise a society save on the basis of some sort of agreement concerning these least common denominators ; the final argument for the view that western europe had to destroy german prussianism was that the system challenged certain ultimate moral values common to western society .
he defined it in terms of what are commonly called western values , and spoke of a european rather than a german ' leitkultur ' .
the announcement briefly described the farm property , and among other values mentioned five hundred cords of rock-maple wood ready to cut and go to market .
good values are those that guide our attitudes and behaviors and allow us to express and define ourselves .
to the artist and the moralist it is a cause of hopeless pessimism , as any civilization must be which has lost touch with all its values and been rationalized to the point of anarchy .
the sum of the terms oscillates between two values ( e .
for one thing , arms values had increased sharply in the meantime .
the system values peace over justice , and has retributive and restorative aspects .
this is to assume that functions of propositions are always truth-functions , and that a function can only occur in a proposition through its values .
by measurements effected on the gases of flames , we arrive at very different values of the masses from those found for ordinary ions , and above all , very different ones for ions of contrary sign .
in march 1854 , yang , delivering his edicts as the word of god , declared that the heroes of the chinese past were to be respected and certain core values maintained .
they 're rooted in the loss of values and the disappearance of work and the breakdown of our families and our communities .
`` it was her mother 's , and i believe she values it . ''
`` women , '' the tutor said , `` lack a sense of values .
the horn of this and of other species was held until almost our times to have medicinal and other more curious values .
but eventually all new values , all the new cultural elements of a society are the result of the changes introduced by the individual .
he fights as one who values his life less than the honour of victory . ''
the shift away from protecting the peasant rice farmers by the government moved the rice industry away from the egalitarian values that were enjoyed by farmers to more of a modern-day , commercial , profit-maximizing industry .
look for no more money ; but for that which a good son values more , and earns by keeping within his income -- the love of his affectionate parents , `` isaac , and joan penniloe . ''
the non-zero elements of ( non-zero singular values ) are the square roots of the non-zero eigenvalues of or .
his artistic explorations do not aim at repeating the folklore but at deriving his inspiration from the past , rich ideology and musical values , and at adhering to the principles of the artistic authenticity .
in addition to the five septs , the shawnee belonged to six clans or subdivisions according to kinship ; each clan represented spiritual values and had a role in the overall confederacy .
chapter xix the virtues introductory =definition of virtue.= -- it is upon the self , upon the agent , that ultimately falls the burden of maintaining and of extending the values which make life reasonable and good .
for here tannhäuser returns to venus unsaved and defying the eternal values , determined to renounce a higher life and give himself up to the pleasure of the senses for all eternity .
care should be taken that observed values are due to the measured signal and not the shape factor of the spectrum analyzer 's filters .
larger values of r1 ( and c1 ) reduce the output ripple to almost negligible levels .
`` he sees and appreciates what is good in us , and sympathizes with the stability of the danish character , but he naturally values the broader thought in everyday life of the english people . ''
a run is a combination of playing cards where cards have consecutive rank values .
but of course the phonetic values of the letters in the turkmen alphabet must in turn have some explanation of their own , and in this explanation surely such languages as german , polish , etc .
what does he care for ignominy that only values himself upon conscience , and not opinion ?
however , if multiple coupling constants are allowed to vary simultaneously , not just α , then in fact almost all combinations of values support a form of stellar fusion .
a tremendous rise in values set in ; the newly married required homes ; architects were rushed to death ; builders , real-estate operators , brokers , could not handle the business hurled at them by impatient bridegrooms .
in irrigated land one grows crops with higher market values .
as we have pointed out , religion is the great conservator of group values and group standards .
its attacks on poetic license and the antirealism of domestic tragedians and morally sententious authors was an attack on the values central to the whig version of personal worth .
many of the present seedling groves are of uncertain origin and represent greatly varying values .
people tend to respond positively to individuals who display the same value system and negatively when their core values are challenged .
the much experienced herder repeatedly prizes children as born physiognomists , and soden values the disinterestedness of children very highly .
“ the work of art , ” it begins , “ is indicated by its coefficient of temperament , color and life -- the three values that produce its unity , deriving the one from man , the other from milieu , the third from the moment .
politics has also to address the new forms of property and their impact on political values in the new pragmatic framework .
building a self-reliant bharat ( india ) - nourishment of bharatiya cultural values .
having calculated the temperature corresponding to each whole millivolt , a curve may be plotted to represent millivolts against corresponding temperatures , and intermediate values deduced from it .
it will be salutary in the first place for the obvious reason that business will have to start again conservatively and with inflated values reduced to something below normal levels .
there was another issue using the keytype in 1955 , with the face values shown trilingually in amharic , english and arabic .
stechkin , on mean values of the modulus of a trigonometric sum , trudy mat .
the end sought is the same -- to get ready money ; and the methods are not essentially unlike -- the exchange of greater future values for smaller present values .
the comparison used the bjøntegaard-delta bit-rate ( bd-br ) measurement method , in which negative values tell how much lower the bit rate is reduced , and positive values tell how much the bit rate is increased for the same psnr .
to-day one of these values is in danger .
where atan2 is a computer function , also called the arctangent of two arguments , that returns the arctangent of the ratio of the two values given .
[ sidenote : the distinction between the values of grains is also scientific . ]
`` in the next paper i will present the results derived from peters , struve , bradley , and various other series of observations , after which the results of all will be brought to bear upon the determination of the best numerical values of the constants involved . ''
mesbah yazdi advocates a return to the values of the 1979 iranian revolution and is a prominent opponent of the reformist movement in iran .
there has been one moral scale of values for the father of his family and another for the same man as ward or state or federal politician ; one code to govern internal disputes within the nation ; another code to govern external disputes between nations .
but now i hope you will not judge her too harshly ; for though she pretends she doesn ’ t care , she values the good opinion of every one , and yours particularly. ’ and gagin smiled again his gentle smile .
these two values constitute the first issue for st. vincent .
a type of 1 club opening bid which shows opening values but does not guarantee clubs , denies a five card major ( and often 5 diamonds as well ) and may have as little as one club ( on a 4441 shape hand ) .
similarities in opinions , interpersonal styles , amount of communication skill , demographics , and values have all been shown in experiments to increase liking .
the annotation of the various phenomena is too explicit , the values are not finely related , and there is little suggestion of atmosphere .
and yet , because athletic reporters are usually men taken from regular reporting and because the same ideas and necessities of news values govern the sporting pages , athletic stories follow , in general , the usual news story form .
those models were used to explain the perihelion advance of mercury , but they could not provide exact values .
due to its cultural and architectural values , this building constitutes a cultural , social , and academic reference at the city centre .
all numeric values in the legacy compatible version are comma separated .
the values of the course in chemical engineering were explained to him at some length , but civil engineering he knew all about .
substituting the values of v , t , p , and a in formula ( 6 ) , we have ( 6 ) v_ { s } = 500 ( 740 - 17.4 ) / ( 760 ( 1 + 0.00366 × 20 ) ) = 442.9 cc .
austin thought that after all betty 's sense of values was just .
beauty in common things ( still life ) 44 beauty in common objects ; a bowl in four different mediums ; principles of grouping ; the accented outline in object drawing ; japanese lanterns studied in values ; use of the finder in making beautiful compositions ; home exercises .
users of the xqj api can bind java values to xquery expressions , preventing code injection attacks .
prospecting intensified and the first high values of gold were discovered in 1939 .
but in general we pursue similar goals and share similar values .
fair in her talents and her ambitions with what the world values most , she buries herself -- where ?
the girls are being taught to distinguish values in textiles and food stuffs ; to manage finances and to keep houses in a sanitary manner .
but it is fair to say that the mass of socialists hold this philosophy with as much solemnity as a reformer held his when he wrote to me that the cure for obscenity was the taxation of land values and absolute free trade .
hanus , paul h. educational aims and educational values .
in my hands lies the keeping of the ideals of two -- '' she closed her eyes and asked for clear vision , for strength to keep true to life's highest values .
rather was it because they misjudged the relative values of their facts .
as a sunni tribal leader , he reassured his fellow sunnis while also representing a familiar type of authority figure for the tribal kurds , and embodying traditional values esteemed by shiite religious figures .
his death in 1888 left meer nairang an orphan , but his pious , courageous mother instilled in him good moral values and an urge to work hard .
variations in the proportion between the respective values of gold and silver 89 grounds of the suspicion that the value of silver still continues to decrease 91 different effects of the progress of improvement upon the real price of three different sorts of rude produce ib .
to conduct one 's self in a more socially acceptable way , viz. , to do a certain thing better than any member of the dominant group , is another excellent mode of enhancing social values .
for does not belief in absolute values necessarily imply belief in a utopia ?
lay in the picture in light values of charcoal , remembering that the colorwashes will darken every tone .
in two years you will be reasonably certain to realize at least twice the difference between the values of the $ 1,500 and the $ 1,200 lots .
throughout the great war , troops fully trained in the british system of musketry and using the short magazine lee enfield rifle , proved beyond dispute the values of the system and of the weapon .
this is a morality which knows and values only the precious species that gave it birth ; whose characteristic -- =reason= -- it makes the condition under which a being may be an object of moral regard .
such publicity might spoil his professional career , be the death-blow of his ambitions , cause him considerable pecuniary loss , alienate the friends he most values , and , worst of all , destroy the happiness of his home life .
it might well be , therefore , that the rise in the values of goods would offset the rise in the value of money , and that prices of goods would rise at the same time that gold is being withdrawn from the money market to the arts .
of course , it would be impracticable to test say the relative values of kinds of vessels , unless all the factors of the problem were the same , except the two factors that were competing .
since the sunshine review act , the legislature has exhibited a resolve to streamline exemptions , allowing confidentiality only to the extent necessary to protect important competing values .
chapter 2 - liberal patriotism and an australian traditionchapter 2 explores whether left liberal values of universalism and compassion for all human beings are compatible with patriotism , which feels a higher level of connection with people of the same country .
the positive direction of these coefficients may afford some consolation to those who put their faith in the vocational significance of academic records of college students , but their low values constitute a somewhat less encouraging commentary .
most often , real estate transactions in the philippines are being sealed higher than their corresponding market and zonal values .
transcending paradigms may go beyond challenging fundamental assumptions , into the realm of changing the values and priorities that lead to the assumptions , and being able to choose among value sets at will .
ghar ek mandir is a family film , where values are given more importance .
this belief that the best values are to be found not far from the surface has since become popular , for it is based upon proven facts .
religion survived in russia beside severe persecution carrying values alternative to the communist ideology .
only works for values in range 51 .
she stated , " i have always been a great admirer of the principles and values behind the work of the red cross .
having modeled the non-linearity of the three channels , developers had to find suitable values by exhaustive search .
part ii an analysis of the dramatic values in plautus the salient features that characterize the plays of plautus include both his consciously employed means of producing his comic effects , and the peculiarities and abnormalities that evidence his attitude of mind in writing them .
the three-distance theorem states that the factors of fixed length n have at most three distinct frequencies , and if there are three values then one is the sum of the other two .
imaginary values , maya mcd 9401 .
quiet nans are used to propagate errors resulting from invalid operations or values , whereas signaling nans can support advanced features such as mixing numerical and symbolic computation or other extensions to basic floating-point arithmetic .
it outlines its values in the forms of protests outside the serbian parliament as well as in the presence of relevant activists and political figures .
children also become aware of class at a very early age and assign different values to each class accordingly .
edmonson uses six institutional values to define _hispano_ culture .
wrf chambering triples the values of the rifle , a larger premium than the same chambering commands on the model 67 .
accepts all common read formats , and outputs read counts , coverage , and fpkm values per reference sequence .
we camped about five miles from abilene , and before i could post myself on cattle values half a dozen buyers had looked the herd over .
by the term values is meant the relations of light and shade to each other .
food and shelter are necessary to any life ; all values rest upon them .
the vowels may be given the familiar “ italian ” values ; _y_ need not be distinguished from _i_ .
for example the inorganic crystal structure database presents all these values using the ångström .
just as in the novel world a hero breaks with society because of his search for authentic values , so in the real world , some people stay oriented towards use values .
chapter xii the later german hymnody 137 i the rising standard of literary values .
for example , the semantics may define the strategy by which expressions are evaluated to values , or the manner in which control structures conditionally execute statements .
conversely , harris maintains that the fact-value distinction is a confusion , proposing that values are really a certain kind of fact .
in a televised press conference and an interview , romney again asserted that the administration had been wrong to , in his view , sympathize with the attackers and apologize for american values rather than to condemn the attackers ' actions .
fresno county , for ten miles about fresno , furnishes the best example of the enormous increase in values which follows the conversion of wheat fields and grazing land into vineyards and orchards .
using explicit formulas for particular values of the gamma function at the integers and half integers gives formulas for the volume of a euclidean ball that do not require an evaluation of the gamma function .
the effect of the rapidity with which such events are thus made known is that , whatever influence they may be calculated to exercise upon certain values , it will almost always have been discounted before the ordinary haphazard speculator gets to know anything about it .
the mystic note in plato , his insistence on moral and spiritual values had made his doctrine harmonize easily with christian dogma .
the determination of the values of these ten functions necessarily gives that of all the functions , infinite in number , which are considered in the whole of mathematical analysis , such at least as it exists at present .
for example , moon lists what he sees as the top ten core cultural values of the builsa society of ghana , as exemplified by proverbs .
but the effects which are produced by currents which rise instantly to high values , as in a disruptive discharge , are entirely different from those produced by dynamo currents which rise and fall harmonically .
in individual cases widely different values of a- or i+ are associated with the same value of a .
“ ‘ a cub is fair ; a cub is happy ; a cub is game. ’ ” “ and above all , a cub values his honor , ” added mr. hatfield , who had overheard the two boys talking .
being considered , for a long time , a heritage of the city , the prestigious building represents a symbol of the high academic and cultural values of our region .
as timecodes in analog systems are prone to bit-errors and drop-outs , most timecode processing devices check for internal consistency in the sequence of timecode values , and use simple error correction schemes to correct for short error bursts .
some techno-optimists , especially transhumanists , avow a form of perfectionism in which the capacity to determine good and trade off fundamental values , is expressed not by humans but by software , genetic engineering of humans , artificial intelligence .
printed on three different colors of paper ( white , yellow and blue ) , they were inscribed ελληνικη διοικησισ δεδεαγατσ with values at the bottom .
there were two values , 1d .
sagesse had divined this fact and valued it , for , speaking generally , there is no man in the world who values honour in another more than your rogue .
in a meta-analysis of empirical studies , they expected to find that when public housing lacks obtrusive architecture and its residents are similar to those already in the neighborhood , property values are not likely to fluctuate .
that is tempting them to the final denial , the last depth of betrayal , the blurring of moral values , the calling of evil good and the saying that good is evil .
the values that shaped hsus 's formation in 1954 , came in some degree from the humane movement that originated in the 1860s in the united states .
bernard can be labelled a rationalist only in a very wide sense ; only in so far as he highly values the rational qualities of man ( bequeathed upon him by god ) .
are not widely removed from those in column xv. , which represent the quotients arising from a division of pearson 's 'county values ' by the number of teamlands that are contained in the counties [ 1364 ] .
in general , direct identifiers are removed from the dataset , replaced with random values , changed using the hashing function , or restored with a unique key .
the values to be assigned to the notions of “ orthodoxy , ” of dogma -- who around them had ever thought of such things before !
a coding with soft sparseness has a smooth gaussian-like distribution , but peakier than gaussian , with many zero values , some small absolute values , fewer larger absolute values , and very few very large absolute values .
many proverbs refer to the values of honesty , friendship , fidelity ( of the woman ) , loyalty , parsimony and obedience to the divine will .
he did not subscribe to american values , in the least .
this was reflected by the below-average monthly relative humidity values across the basin .
he also posited that historically " different strains in one population have showed differential survival values and often one has reemerged at the expense of others ( in europeans ) " , in the races of europe , the white race and the new world ( 1939 ) .
roman numerals , the numeric system used in ancient rome , employs combinations of letters from the latin alphabet to signify values .
conflicts may be caused by differing goals , values or perceptions of the team members .
the peak forms part of an antarctic specially protected area ( aspa 140 ) , comprising several separate sites on deception island , and designated as such primarily for its botanic and ecological values .
the values calculated using the jmol script on this page will be used in this article in place of the preferred but unavailable measured values of these distances .
[ illustration : the above diagram shows the course of the commercial ratio of the values of gold and silver during the bimetallic period of france .
the eurostile font previously used in the briefcase values and the displayed values on the screens are replaced by impact and verdana .
on the distribution of values of angles determined by coplanar points , j .
jewish ethical practice is typically understood to be marked by values such as justice , truth , peace , loving-kindness ( chesed ) , compassion , humility , and self-respect .
crucial to rbc models , " plausible values " for structural variables such as the discount rate , and the rate of capital depreciation are used in the creation of simulated variable paths .
their main contribution was to the sunday breakfast show which covered faith and moral values .
the values found for v by different observers are not very consistent .
this has the potential to greatly change cultural values attached to the lawn , as they are increasingly viewed as environmentally and economically unviable in the modern context .
whom can he give but mere slaves and servants like thyself , whose lives he no more values than we an english hound ?
these values , which indicate structural impairment of the river , show that the middle reaches of the wieseck at großen- -buseck are " unsatisfactory " , and the lower reaches in the urban area are " poor " .
authentication for parties that wish to retrieve password values .
for living chief justices , the values are calculated to .
tokens , it may not be generally known , were coins , usually having the values of a farthing , a halfpenny , and a penny , which local traders were permitted to issue to supply the scarcity of a small coinage from the national treasury .
the cipm meeting of october 2010 reviewed progress towards establishing fixed values for the constants but found that " the conditions set by the general conference at its 23rd meeting have not yet been fully met .
_instruments as indicators of direction._—the relative values of different kinds of instruments , such as columns , pendulums , and the like , as indicators of direction have already been discussed .
these values give us a curve of beautiful and surprising smoothness , from which we seem compelled to draw the direct conclusion that the climate of arizona , during the last 500 years , has fluctuated with a regular periodicity of almost precisely 150 years .
it saved the situation for both of them , the young man from his wildness , the older from the violent distortion of values which had become necessary if he were to move easily and comfortably in the swim .
variation 3 utilizes the same principle in reverse , the chorale supported by shorter note values in the bass .
for a very accurate view , there are no materials in existence ; neither would it lead to any very different conclusion , if the proportional values were ascertained with the greatest accuracy .
the religious values of men are standardized not upon the brilliant or saintly or accomplished , not upon the well-to-do members of the community , but upon the poor who are just able to stand and maintain themselves in the life of that community .
[ 359 ] its explanation turns upon a particular theory of international trade which we can only mention in passing , but which we shall find more fully developed in stuart mill ’ s theory of international values .
hardly has this hedonistic conception of art been received by philosophers who admit one or more spiritual values , truth or morality , when the following question must necessarily be asked : what must be done with art ?
the distinction between higher and lower values has received its most impressive symbol in the conception of `` another world , '' in which there is neither pain nor sin , but eternal blessedness and eternal life .
nature consequently gains a deeper significance of meaning when we recognise that it gives birth to mind and spirit -- characteristics which merge into consciousness , values , and ideals .
members take part in a culture even if each member 's personal values do not entirely agree with some of the normative values sanctioned in that culture .
of course , much larger values of a , b , and p would be needed to make this example secure , since there are only 23 possible results of n mod 23 .
the artist is a contemptible fellow because he cares more for his art than for the things of the world ; for whatever the worldling values he thinks every one else should value .
i impressed upon him , excellenz , what the punishment for treachery would be , and he values his own skin above all things in the world . ''
you never hear of values in a picture shrinking ; but rents , stocks , real estate -- all those values shrink abominably .
but apart from food values they interest me as subjects for the cubist , the vorticist and other exploiters of dynamic force in the art of to-day ( i fancy i told you in a previous letter that i am engaged upon a tome on this subject ) .
the bulk of the work , however , is a collection of tabulated precomputed values that provide the position of the sun at any point in time .
the quantum hall experiments are used to check the stability of working standards that have convenient values for comparison .
the histogram represents the current distribution of brightness values in the image .
linear regression assumes homoscedasticity , that the error variance is the same for all values of the criterion .
his color has always been crude , his values or relations not well preserved , and his brush-work hard and tortured .
huntington 's thesis of a clash of civilizations , pointing instead to indices of a convergence in styles of life and in values among civilisations .
such competitions of values for the position of control of action are inevitable accompaniments of individual conduct , whether in civilized or in tribal life .
whatever the abundance of created values and the proportion in which they exchange for each other , in order that we may exchange our products , mine must suit you when you are the buyer , and i must be satisfied with yours when you are the seller .
then she was left alone with her humor and her new england conscience , that stern adjuster of real values and enemy of spiritual dissipation .
all new addition were carefully adopted to the existent structure in order to emphasise the historical values of the building while giving space for modern installations and demands on accessibility .
the separator and the conjunction can be specified with the same values as the separator in the list function .
the result would be that speculative values would be kept down , and that cultivated and improved farms would have no taxes to pay until the country around them had been well settled .
imbued with the values of jesus and his disciples , blessed mother mary , st .
he says : `` nor is it of consequence that paul values comparatively lightly , having known him in the flesh . ''
using the main template as an input-easy feature , there are few calculations done ( actually only two hex2dec ) , and allows for adding default values not too deep in the templates .
she knew values by instinct , and she knew there was nothing shoddy and nothing carelessly purchased in the room .
having no definitive values , one is nothing , insubstantial and devoid of character .
these values are for inputs of length in cm and result in weight in kg .
for large values of n , the t-distribution doesn 't significantly differ from a standard normal distribution .
that cause is the confident expectation of the future enhancement of land values , which arises in all progressive countries from the steady increase of rent , and which leads to speculation , or the holding of land for a higher price than it would then otherwise bring .
fortune 500 list of america 's largest corporations during june 2012 , the company 's vice-president for diversity stated that general mills opposes a minnesota amendment banning gay marriage , stating that the company values " inclusion " .
onegin received mixed reviews , with praise for its production values and performances , but criticism was leveled at the pacing and writing .
the transmission of a signal which represents both the brightness values and the color values in a picture .
set of values of an [ [ enumerated type ] ] internally as a bit vector , as a safer alternative to bitfields .
to correct for this , the encoder takes the difference of all corresponding pixels of the two macroblocks , and on that macroblock difference then computes the strings of coefficient values as described above .
to his real data indicating critical biomass he added imaginary values for the parameters of climate , range , longevity , fertility period and ruhan indices to get an estimated figure .
the exponential function assumes fractional values while the population at any time is an integer .
the courts have been inclined to view the distribution of values between territorial units on the track-mileage basis as being a fair one .
thus , many sources often cite differing values for isoelectric points of these materials .
when trochaic rhythms were beaten out with a distinct pause after each measure , the relative values of the two intervals were 1.000:2.046 .
[ 113 ] these are merely rough percentages based on arbitrary values for partial resemblances .
there he associates with kindred souls to attempt a restoration of traditional values in the traditional manner .
the tradition may have provided squatters with a sense that their actions enjoyed some legitimacy conferred by an older code of laws more in tune with values of social justice than the supposed " norman yoke " .
in statistics , crude denotes values before adjustment for confounding variables .
`` why , i mean , '' said sylvia , trying hard to reduce to articulateness a complicated conception , `` i mean that father and mother just deliberately represented values to me as different from what they really are , with real folks !
in terms of each card 's numerical values , each ace has a value of one .
he believes that the death penalty , due to the extreme nature of its punishment , provides a unique opportunity to examine american values and beliefs and how they are manifested in the american legal system .
the attack is partly therefore on the faith in transcendent values which fixes man 's relative position by projecting him upon the screen of an infinite existence and which asserts that he has an absolute , that is , an other-than-human guide .
in small rivers , on the other hand , the values of c vary little with the slope .
saxon's fingers had been tingling for a brush to hold and his lids had been unconsciously dropping , that his eyes might appraise the colors in simplified tones and values .
this practical approach to problems can be seen in the homes he built , the tools he made , the clothes he wore , the political and social systems under which he operated , and the set of values by which he was motivated .
`` i have several other topics here , '' he went on , `` some appealing to our citizens ' love of beauty and some to their notions of commercial values .
the contour integral around any parallelogram in the lattice must vanish , because the values assumed by the doubly periodic function along the two pairs of parallel sides are identical , and the two pairs of sides are traversed in opposite directions as we move around the contour .
export score-card home-trade score-card flavor 45 flavor 50 body and texture 30 body and texture 25 color 15 color 15 finish 10 finish 10 -- - -- - total 100 total 100 the same qualities are recognized in each score-card , but different numerical values are given them .
h1 ( or equivalently of the dense subspace h0 ) , taking values in h1 .
`` restriction of output '' is an immediate necessity if we wish to regain control of the real values , so that unimpeded , unhindered , and without danger of inner corruption , humanity may protect its own health and powers .
the arp saw an important role for the state in upholding the values of the dutch people .
one class for experienced housewives , to deal particularly with the problem of presentation , and another class for college girls , to give them the simple principles of food values and preparation , taking up at the same time the method of presentation .
the bilingual boss accordingly furnishes us with two important ideographs , and the phonetic values of four other characters .
it was as though i were suddenly transported into a world in which the values were changed .
as did many of van wyk 's contemporaries of the time , he felt that the stature of any composer , and more importantly , a composer from south africa , had to be measured by the european landscape of artistic merit and aesthetic values .
the aegl values gives the expected effects of exposure to certain compounds .
this general relationship , first noted by the french physiocrats in the 18th century , is one basis for advocating the collection of a tax based on land rents to help defray the cost of public investment that helps create land values .
the experimental determination of pka values is commonly performed by means of titrations , in a medium of high ionic strength and at constant temperature .
westermark_ teaches , “ there is no absolute standard of morality , ” that “ there are no general truths , ” “ that all moral values , ” as prof. _r .
second , how do we preserve our old and enduring values as we move into the future ?
the corporation had never been for markets , limited government , private property , or the other values associated with the business cause " , he wrote [ weaver , 99 ] .
there is , for example , a conception of the theme which stresses the element of spiritual conflict , and draws upon it , as well as upon its human values , for dramatic inspiration .
the first stamps , 1d and 6d values featuring the profile of queen victoria , were issued 19 june 1878 .
perhaps the war has confused my sense of spiritual values .
another point to be observed in el greco ’ s use of color is that he did not spread his pigment thin over an underpainting of light and dark , but actually modeled in color , obtaining the chiaroscuro by means of values .
interval arithmetic can be used in various areas ( such as set inversion , motion planning , set estimation or stability analysis ) , in order to be treated estimates for which no exact numerical values can stated .
stockton college is to provide students of promise a superb education within an active learning community founded upon integrity and the best values of faith and the human spirit .
another , rising out of the first , consists in relative values .
muldoon , however , knew that waring had similar views and values on the economy to his own and that she had the intellectual capacity and drive to cope with complex investigation and analysis .
* logical , “ values ” are the only centres of interest that can lay claim to universality .
in 1630 , christoph scheiner reported that the sun had different rotational periods at the poles and at the equator , in good agreement with modern values .
no woman who values her health should submit to any tight lacing .
also , as later observations at innsbruck give more normal values for q , some doubt may be felt as to the earlier observations there .
it might emphasize , for example , the health and continuity of the race , or individual moral character , far more than the distribution of economic values .
please leave the code out , and understand the language and values behind the gfdl .
the residue database contains average values of residues for more than 350 pesticides and environmental contaminants .
would any real social values be lost if incomes averaged $ 2,000 and none exceeded $ 10,000 ?
intellectual values are utilitarian in their origin but aesthetic in their form , since the advantage of knowledge is often lost sight of , and ideas are prized for their own sake .
she contends that the fathers of confederation were motivated by the values of the enlightenment of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries .
the best that could be done would be to take an inventory of all land values now , and provide for a recurrent reappraisal ; then to take all , or a large percentage , of the increased value from now on .
the medalla isidro fabela is awarded for " steadfastness for the values that sustain the culture and democracy in our region .
individual cmdlets can also define dynamic completion of argument values where the completion values are computed dynamically on the running system .
in addition , the negative values for the magnetic component is directly related to its left-handed nomenclature , and properties ( discussed in a section below ) .
in contests between two men judges may assign values to hits as follows : -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- - | thrusts | | butt | and | cuts .
she gives great credit to her grandmother ( darlene enno ) for a lot of her values and morals with which she tries to live her everyday life with .
trading houses use computer modelling to try to predict the values of stock markets , but mostly to try to do short-term arbitrage .
there are values in system design .
berkeley , liberals are divided over whether to adhere to 1960s-rooted values or to rethink approaches toward achieving the goals of feminism , affirmative action and other causes .
stability of gold and silver values 81 gold-standard prices 81 silver-standard prices 94 chapter v. criticism of some gold-standard arguments 98 chapter vi .
such was the reasoning of the interstate commerce commission in a decision , holding that fire , building and paving brick must be accorded equal rates , regardless of their differing values .
there is thus a function f ( x , y ) which gives for any values of x and y the corresponding value of a .
`` madame vanel , i have been told , values it at fourteen hundred thousand livres . ''
this moral hypostasis involved in the love of fame could never be rationalised , but would subsist unmitigated or die out unobserved , were it not associated with other conceptions and other habits of estimating values .
part of the friendship centre movement , senators are individuals who are recognized for representing a set of values which reflect past developments of the movement while allowing the current leadership and membership the right to define their own direction .
when set to 1 , requires that memory coherence must be enforced regardless of the values of the other qualifiers .
the school aims to enable girls to take charge of their learning , make decisions based on christian values , live in the world as independent women , and meet the challenges of the 21st century .
the altitude of this cloud was only about 4000 metres , one of the least values recorded at exeter for cirro-stratus of any kind .
i constructed a sort of method of my own. ” that man yet has no sense of literary values , as they are usually considered .
after that , if you are two mature people with shared values an adult relationship is possible , assuming you have been brought up to value respect and affection .
it failed in giving a true sense of the values of life .
on january 1 , 2007 , the php2,500 and php5,000 case values were replaced by the php75,000 and the php4,000,000 case values ( the latter being the highest amount ) .
this increase in the quantity of exchange values simply proves that the demand for the goods concerned is stronger than the demand for some others .
the old merchant used to tote about commodities ; the new one creates values .
from 1908 postage stamps were valid for fiscal use , but in 1936 high values were issued inscribed for use as revenues only .
poincare either requires that the function have average value 0 , or have boundary values 0 .
milly , it 's true , '' she said , to be exact , `` has no natural sense of social values , does n't in the least understand our differences or know who 's who or what 's what . ''
the film has developed a small cult following , despite peebles ' lack of rapping ability and the film 's overall poor production values .
these roman associations of the pileus with liberty and republicanism were carried forward to the 18th-century , when the pileus was confused with the phyrgian cap , with the phrygian cap then becoming a symbol of those values .
the following are the relative percentages of values : flags .
the time-binding capacity of humans creates and formulates new values for the service of mankind .
simplified photometric values are usually given by fixture manufacturers for use in this method .
to get round this the values are scaled back to fit inside the 0-255 range .
in this form of constraint satisfaction , variable values are terms .
they seek to adapt a traditional religion to more liberal , human-rights oriented values , like reform judaism does with judaism .
council for cooperation and coordination ( ccc ) furthering the acju 's role in community service , this division focuses on humanitarian values and exists to foster and grow the unity and co-existence the muslim and non-muslim community has enjoyed for over a thousand years .
pure line , caprice of detail , distance and atmosphere , he reserved for his etchings ; and a subtle expression of values of `` moss-like gradations '' for his lithographs .
in order to give a just idea of the trade and profits on different articles sold at sansanding , i have annexed a list of _european_ and _african_ articles , with their respective values in _cowries_ , the great medium of exchange and the general currency of bambarra .
the program then produces a list of tag snps and their statistical test values as well as a coverage report .
this would not , however , involve any loss to our finances ; we could obviously realise the enhanced values of the old wines by selling them to outsiders , if the members of common room would not buy them .
false values and fatuous words : these are the worst monsters for mortals -- long slumbereth and waiteth the fate that is in them .
national lifeguard certification builds on the fundamental skills , knowledge and values of the lifesaving society to develop the practical skills and knowledge required by lifeguards .
our service provides preeminence in creating , communicating , preserving and applying knowledge , art , and academic values and in developing leaders and citizens for people throughout the world who will accept challenge .
the creative personality alone is the father of the objective values of civilisation .
the software can be used to predict pka values and logp values .
the run queue may contain priority values for each process , which will be used by the scheduler to determine which process to run next .
but they , in the complete contrast they offered , had little recognition of individual values and judged a dish by the platter it was served on .
the continual presence of sentries and barbed wire flung before us a perpetual symbol of the intelligence fettered by the values of the phenomenal world .
+ ... , the series on the right-hand being convergent for all values of x and therefore defining an analytical function of x which is uniform and regular all over the plane .
the information gain is equal to the total entropy for an attribute if for each of the attribute values a unique classification can be made for the result attribute .
that , in spite of these circumstances , married men so often voluntarily place themselves in a position of equality with their wives in regard to authority in the home and with the children is the best proof of the power of the feelings to protect essential values .
and in doing this they were compelled to discard the precious values of art , religion and social life of which this superfluous energy is the creator .
in this voyage americus vespucius passed the equator by a distance which he values at 52° .
hargrove 's strategy caused some controversy among long-time ndp activists and union members who saw him as reneging on core labour and left-wing values .
in practice , a fixity check is most often accomplished by computing checksum or cryptographic hash function values for a file and comparing them to a stored value or through digital signatures .
multiple values may be listed , e .
great britain has long been a country where moral values are highly esteemed ; we are indeed experts in the practice , though perhaps not in the theory of morality , a lacuna which i believe this book will fill .
but for low values of t , viz .
she had seemed winning enough before , but now -- what a rise in values !
the recent creation of a series of templates designed to map area codes to values on the french wikipedia caused a significant detrimental effect on overall performance , reports lead performance architect tim starling .
we get a new pair of values for _e_ { c } _ and _i_ { b } _ , getting _e_ { c } _ from the voltmeter and _i_ { b } _ from the ammeter .
using the up truck , douglas traverses the area to get the best possible idea of what residents want to see displayed as a work of art that embodies the neighborhood 's core values .
at that time , it was customary to denote as " epochs " , not the standard date and time of origin for time-varying astronomical quantities , but rather the values at that date and time of those time-varying quantities themselves .
university high school is very centered around its core values , and daily activities at the school revolve around these core values .
transvaluers of old values do not spend all their time sipping absinthe .
the flood of gold makes it difficult to gage the full meaning of the incredible increase in values , for in the decade ending with 1909 over 41,600,000 ounces of gold were mined in the united states alone .
the college ratified its proposed constitution and by laws , and identified benildean core values in november 1994 .
the humanistic nurse values nursing as a situation in which the necessary conditions for such human actualization exist and is open to the possibilities in the intimately shared nurse-patient here and now .
to keep things simple for now , we will work with uncorrected values .
the issues of values underlying this practice are usually known as primary care ethics .
amount was then further revised to higher values by successive governments .
united states seen as deviating from what are widely perceived to be fundamental american cultural and political values .
the optimal values of these parameters for each individual differ .
i have merely taken mean values for these two groups , and expressed the monthly values as percentages of the mean annual increase .
you preach the values of traditional ( french ) cuisine but at the same time are an avid supporter of le fooding , which you praised this week for its playful , less formal approach to gastronomy .
she was very greatly exercised by the two systems of values -- the two series of explanations that her comparative anatomy on the one hand and her sense of beauty on the other , set going in her thoughts .
the settlers ' children , like many youth of this era , were rebellious and rejected their parents ' values .
i would only put it to any person whether the friendship he values most is not that which is least coarsened by praise ; and in which he and his friend are led the least frequently to think of their opinion of each other .
the values of seny were transmitted from generation to generation without much change in the shape of aphorisms and moral stories .
the use of an indirect palette means that color changes associated with the presence or absence of energy shields , emergency alarms , and the screen flash representing destruction of the ship can be accomplished by simply changing the palette values in memory registers .
generally , it is recognised that public order , safety , health and democratic values justify the imposition of restrictions on the exercise of fundamental rights .
this movement has been inspired by an ideal of a democratic community as definite as the socialist ideal , and it has grown steadily in popular favour as the justice of a tax on land values has been recognised .
our job is not to judge or make articles appeal to our own personal values .
the tiger from tjampa is by no means a simple story of revenge , but is really an exploration of the practise and philosophical bases of pencak silat , and its relation to islamic values .
in this way , it is rather as if the ph scale has been extended to very negative values .
because the equation is second order in the time derivative , then by the nature of solving differential equations , one must specify both the initial values of the wave function itself and of its first time derivative , in order to solve definite problems .
all great ruler-art , then , is , as it were , a song of praise , a magnificat , appealing only to those , and pleasing only those , who feel in sympathy with the values which it advocates .
the hourly values are derived from smoothed curves , the object being to get the mean ordinate for a 60-minute period .
i put a note for the values that are not yet certified for commercial use but are only published in the data sheets of the manufacturer .
in practice , it turns out that it is not possible to get such a consistent state of the memory by just accessing one shared register after another , since the values stored in individual registers can be changed at any time during this process .
the misery admits of no denial , but we are not persuaded that mr and mrs hammond have given the right values to the various causes when they enter upon explanations .
the first pass determines the average of those values ; the second pass determines the sum of the squares of the differences between the values and the average .
the education they receive does not reveal the relations of ethics to life ; the struggle for existence dulls the mind ; while the depleted physical conditions caused by bad air , mal-nutrition and ignorance of real values reduce moral resistance almost to zero .
he sought to refresh the world with a water-spout of idealism , as if to change the names of things could change their values .
the soviet union must realize that its decision to use military force in afghanistan will be costly to every political and economic relationship it values .
the fit values are that the nucleation rate due to a single impurity particle is 0 .
our nationalism overshadowed our national values , but our collective story was saved from deconstruction .
_work of animal prime movers upon machines._ results of experience as to the values of the daily work which animal motors can supply under different circumstances without exceeding the fatigue which sleep and nourishment are capable of repairing .
an absolutely infinite number can not be expressed in the algebraic or geometrical values ; the attempt so to express it limits it in a certain sense , and therefore destroys its absolute infinity .
in sheer wilfulness it has tried to empty life of all its values .
she had no sense of spiritual values as yet .
the king of abyssinia values himself , and his predecessors , upon never having molested or troubled any of his neighbours who were kings , nor borne any envy towards them .
the image data was encoded as a comma-separated list of byte values , each written in the c hexadecimal notation , ' 0x13 ' for example , so that multiple bytes are used to express a single byte of image information .
the council on books in wartime decided to choose a limited selection of high quality books for the public that clarified why the united states was at war , what values were at stake , and the terms which peace might be extended .
with extreme parameter values , pitch correction has also become popular as a distinctively electronic voice effect .
generally base values of power and voltage are chosen .
they are why we say tonight : private values must be at the heart of public policies .
do any of these values represent full thickness of the formation , and if so , which ones ?
[ 134 ] to those interested in child welfare and human values this is the supreme tragedy of the city .
its editorial line can be described as libertarian , conservative and strongly influenced by western thought , upholding the values of individual autonomy , private property and a laissez-faire economic policy .
thus , in order for a unique key to uniquely identify each row in a table , null values must not be used .
_in_ montague , c. e. dramatic values .
impact of news values on reporting death , sickness and suffering .
in turning from primarily writing non-fiction for adults to juvenile fiction tunis did not abandon his emphasis on values over victory , but it did give him an audience that seemed more willing to listen .
a rational function is defined to have the pr property if it has a positive real part and is analytic in the right halfplane of the complex plane and takes on real values on the real axis .
in our current theory of physics , there is no reason why the neutrino mixing angles should have any particular values .
when people have to choose between euthanizing or declawing a cat , personal values come into play .
as such , they may bring down property values .
the standard assembler places constant values for arithmetic in the current page .
the book chronicles the effect this event has on his descendants , in the midst of the twentieth century 's changes in traditions and values in this provincial city of splendid mansions and convents that still guard unexpected secrets .
in this dim land of ours we are accustomed to pay too much respect to fictitious values ; we worship invisibilities and in our enjoyment of immediate life we are restrained by imaginary inhibitions .
he knows that there are real values in life that are worthy of his powers and best efforts , and these real values are the goal of his endeavors .
metropolitan avenue august 16 , 1988 christine noschese metropolitan avenue is an inspiring contemporary story about women who strive to combine new roles and old values in our rapidly changing society .
this table also shows the values they map to in ascii .
when submitting a workflow job , values for the parameters must be provided .
we developed a new interest in agriculture , and learned the food values of many products that had formerly been neglected .
saturn , however , has far more sparingly provided the data for such an investigation ; for if we disregard schröter ’ s uncertain figures , we have but two values for the rotation-period .
a system of media values consists of and is constructed by journalists ' and other actors ' decisions about issues like what is " newsworthy , " how to frame the news , and whether to observe topical " red lines .
a kind of court-martial was held on the ostrich ; the relative values of himself and of the diamond being accurately calculated , that his judges might decide whether he should live or die .
self-discipline presupposes rational arrangement of , and adjustment to , basic values .
that is a great and wonderful translation , but it has done some harm in the world by not always giving true values to great truths .
the report is sometimes also called the philadelphia fed index because it includes reporting of some index values .
`` they belong to no one , no one values them .
the party espoused right wing christian values and advocated state support of bible reading as well as the more central platform of alcohol prohibition .
in an artistical composition , the character of any one part in its relation to other parts and to the whole ; -- often used in the plural ; as , the values are well given , or well maintained .
a study by the university of missouri found that property values near cafos decreased from 6 .
she inherits very strong values of passion and foresight from her father and has intense social and ethical concerns which indulges her in many philanthropic enterprises to provide education for the less fortunate .
these addresses are typically displayed in quad-dotted notation as decimal values of four octets , each in the range 0 to 255 , or 8 bits per number .
in the early days of the israeli state , the ussr heavily courted israel , believing that the kibbutz movement and ( at that time ) strong socialist values of the chalutzim made the country ripe for being a client state .
for a long time no other value was engraved but the six pence stamps were printed in a variety of colors and surcharged with the desired values .
corporate behaviour ( internal values , norms , etc .
oils with high iodine values have good drying powers , while those with low iodine values are , as a rule , very slow drying in nature .
data structures have predetermined offsets ( or links or paths ) from the start of the structure , in which data values are stored .
more than all , there are no fictitious values put upon fads and fancies of the hour , -- nor even upon works of art .
in recollecting and reflecting on perceptions and responses in all these extremes one becomes freer to select from within one 's self the values to be chosen , actualized , and potentiated in one 's nursing practice .
from these data , the dr. values the yearly rent of corn lands at two millions sterling , and those of pasture , & c. at seven millions , in all nine millions .
the prospect may become a mine by proving itself profitably workable : if it simply carries values which can not be realized to advantage , then it must continue as a mere prospect .
children with pressing social needs must have books with social values to meet those needs ; chiefest of these are right social contacts , true social perspective , traditions of family and race , loveliness of nature , companionship of living things , right group association and group interests .
the district includes areas with significant conservation and cultural values .
`` mammy was right in telling you not to go in without asking , because there are a great many books and papers there that father values , and you might upset them .
of course , here it ’ s very crudely put -- the values aren ’ t brought out -- ah !
and , in this mission of adjustment and service between the various values of life , reason will have a co-equal as a helper .
mr. pelley has “ the human touch. ” his stories of paris , vermont , have a homely quality which never over-stresses the emotional values , even when it almost seems as if the author were going to sentimentalize them .
it is safe to estimate the average enhancement of values to be at least 100 % over this period ; those not reaching such an increased price fully made up for by others which have many times doubled in value .
through his characters he wanted to show different cultures , backgrounds and values .
ought i not to bestow the princess on one who values her at such a price ? ''
in contrast , risk and uncertainty are formally characterised by a whole range of possible values connected to an object .
in economic science , we have said after adam smith , the point of view from which all values are compared is labor ; as for the unit of measure , that adopted in france is the franc .
the more we learn about this stuff - the harder it is to attach values to these kinds of actions .
overton brooks , _chairman , committee on science and astronautics._ dear mr. chairman : i am forwarding herewith for your consideration a staff study , `` the practical values of space exploration . ''
a monochrome raster image where the pixel values are to be interpreted as alpha values is known as a matte .
words in the lexicon are assigned numeric values for emotional quantifiers such as duration , impact , immediacy , intensity , and others .
this adaption will develop by natural selection when two parties can make themselves better off than they were before by exchanging things one party values less for things the other party values for more .
the values of π are generally taken from the table of kapteyn and weersma mentioned in the previous chapter .
k ) and relatively high electronegativity values ( all more than 1 .
this means that compositional values quoted for representative samples of foods in food composition tables do not necessarily apply to individual samples of foods .
in order to intrigue an audience , fahnestock suggests " science journalism requires the adjustment of new information to an audiences already held values and assumption " .
characteristics can then be efficiently computed by choosing values for the differences at the start and end of the inbound phase , propagating these towards the middle , and looking for matches in the input and output of the s-box .
an intense debate began about racial integration , property values , and the good faith of the residents , community officials and builders .
an irresistible , diabolical curiosity impels him to transvalue all values with which men have reckoned , and to inquire whether they are values at all ; whether '' good '' must not be called evil , `` truth '' error .
2d. , postage-stamp collecting , a standard guide to ; or , a complete list of all the postage stamps known to exist , with their values and degrees of rarity .
the sense or feeling of quality -- that which measures accurately spiritual and artistic values -- his very breadth and practical largeness , his democracy , allow no growth to .
in the recent deflation in commodity values , there was widespread '' welching '' among business men who had theretofore been classed as reputable .
`` inflates land values so that farming does n't pay with the already heavy building charges for the dam . ''
the refractive indices of the rays traversing one of the principal directions have the values corresponding to the other two .
wright , and albert feuerwerker argued in effect that traditional chinese values were a barrier to modernity and would have to be dismantled before china could make progress .
the philosophical subgenres posthumanism and transhumanism ( sometimes used synonymously ) are extensions of humanistic values .
like composure , extroversion is composed of four seemingly synonymous values .
growing up with tv results in stereotypes of language and attitudes representing a background of shared expressions , gestures , and values .
meanwhile , the elected chiefs have tended to be associated ( though in a much looser and general way ) with democratic , legislative and canadian governmental values .
if using arbitrary precision numbers , the slow math will be slow for small values of n and large values of n .
if the land is located near town or city where speculative operations have enhanced values , the cost will be considerably more .
that a tremendous decline in values was the consequence will be readily understood .
the left-hand portion of this table gives the values for intervals of 500 years from 2000 b.c .
they felt that the originally stated significance values were " meaningless " .
sigma phi beta values brotherhood , diversity , leadership , education , scholarship , fraternity life , and community service .
the provision of this and that may be more accurately calculated according to tried values .
this tracking category is intended to help locate cases where such invalid precision values are being used so that they can be eliminated at the source .
| + -- -- -- -- + -- -- -- -- + -- -- -- -- + -- -- -- -- -+ -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- + |w^e v|w^e l_2 |w^e |w^e l_2 v| cross-over values .
the teacher must have , then , willingness to study the subject , ability to teach as contrasted with mere talking , sympathy with parenthood , and a passion for the religious personal values in life .
it is essential to-day to know something about food values , the arrangement of meals , which avoid monotony , and provide that requisite variety in nourishment , on which the good health and ultimately the good temper of the household depend .
the customer sees only the exposed portion of the frame and the covering and , except in the case of advertised goods , knows no more about the construction and concealed values of a piece than is told her by the salesperson .
catalonia abroad , offering an image of excellence and promoting the values and assets of the country .
the right-singular vectors corresponding to vanishing singular values of span the null space of .
the aggregates of the + and - disturbances for a particular hour of the day were seldom equal , and thus after the removal of the disturbed values the mean value of the element for that hour was generally altered .
i regret this , you understand , and i shall no doubt be much criticized in french canada and russia , where there are still civilized values .
by modifying the values of and in , eventually there will be some appropriate values ( ) for which she is found to be indifferent between it and .
several studies investigated differential diagnostic values of crp in a series of inflammatory disease ( including inflammatory bowel disease , intestinal lymphoma , intestinal tuberculosis and behcet 's syndrome ) , and compared crp to other inflammatory biomarkers , such as esr and wbc .
such provision would go far to relieve distress in a multitude of families , would stabilize values in many communities , and would liberate working capital to thousands of concerns .
direct competition of routes , therefore , has to do with pure transportation , -- the creation of place values , -- and this being the case , the relative cost of service is always a factor of moment .
possessing herself of these new values , woman has turned them into instruments to assure her sovereignty .
with a polynomial equation , the wheels representing the unknown spin round , and the result gives the values of the sum of the variables .
o 'brien responded by saying he " welcomed the sentiment " but pointed out that " a tangible example by the government over the last decade that it acknowledged or endorsed religious values would also have been welcomed .
in contrast , reference data usually consists only of a list of permissible values and attached textual descriptions .
sir tryamour is also concerned with the social values of knighthood , kingship , and kinship relationships .
iec 11172-3 defines the range of values for each section of the header along with the specification of the header .
we can not build up the diet on calorie values alone without consideration of the food elements .
the range is 0 to 255 , which is 256 total values .
it defines the concepts of sine and cosine , and also contains the earliest tables of sine and cosine values ( in 3 .
the bar allows users to make adjustments to a value or process throughout a range of allowed values .
this construction extends the usual algorithm to possibly non-integer values of β .
`` some values are enjoyed under an implied limitation , and must yield to the police power .
when a woman thinks that her house is on fire , her instinct is at once to rush to the thing which she values most .
each binwrite statement causes the values of the list expressions to be written in one logical record in binary format on the designated unit .
in this aspect conscience is a _résumé_ of the _generic_ values realized under the system of custom and authority , but to the present continued attainment of which the _particular prescriptions_ of custom and authority are no longer adequate guides .
since this only depends on values on the edge , every triangle which shares this edge will produce the same point , so the contour will be continuous .
as far as i remember all special values have the maximum characteristic , so you loose far far less than half of the number space .
the eunuch sings as if he had an oboe in his throat ; it is much too harsh and lacking in brilliancy for our ear , which values incomparably higher the more brilliant , clearer _timbre_ , corresponding to the tone of the flute , clarinet , or horn .
this true relation explains how it is that the right stands the very highest in the grade of values , without its becoming right by its profitableness .
february 5 , 2003 as a means to strengthen the relationship between two nations that share history , values and traditions .
the older schools , conscious of this , were satisfied to paint in a scale of correspondence , in which the relative values were fairly kept .
in 1929 the league of united latin american citizens ( lulac ) was formed on the premise that full acceptance of american social , educational and political values was the only way latinos could reasonably expect to improve their political , economic , and social position in american society .
furthermore , the mad argument was criticized on the grounds that mad only covered intentional , full-scale nuclear attacks by a rational , non-suicidal opponent with similar values .
the normalization diminishes the absolute values of the functions considerably but not universally .
south inserts a game try of 3 , inviting the partner to bid the game of 4 with good club support and overall values .
he lost his good name , the girl he loved , his home , everything in the world an honest man values .
according to this study , monkeys neatly fixed their gazes only at objects with higher values learned in previous training .
accepts that we have to set priorities and that sometimes we have to compromise , but insists that we should never lose sight of our fundamental values .
the `` absolute '' pacifist places at the very apex of his scale of values respect for every human personality so great that he can not inflict injury on any human being regardless of the circumstances in which he finds himself .
these functions have no closed form and you usually look their values up in a table .
christian values to secular institutions .
true artists , turned critics , think also less of rules than of values , and no ignorant public can be trusted to join the critics in losing temper judiciously over the date or correctness of a portrait until they knew something of its motives and merits .
in mathematics , the gromov norm ( or simplicial volume ) of a compact oriented n-manifold is a norm on the homology ( with real coefficients ) given by minimizing the sum of the absolute values of the coefficients over all singular chains representing a cycle .
awarded to individuals whose accomplishments on and off the field demonstrate the higher values promoted by the organization .
the optional unified cycle works on the model of the unities of capitalizable values called " modules longs " ( 42 hours - 4 credits ) or " modules courts " ( 21 hours - 2 credits ) .
her father was disturbed by this failure to acquiesce in the normal , usual standard of values .
this feature of the commission 's summarized data is particularly presented in tables 5 , 6 , and 7 , in which are shown the sources , volume , and foreign values of imported hats .
the values reflected therein correspond to the values on which literacy is founded and for which literacy-inspired ideologies fought .
of all the world 's knowledge the serious specialist values only one little plot .
the special values such as infinity and nan ensure that the floating-point arithmetic is algebraically completed , such that every floating-point operation produces a well-defined result and will not by default throw a machine interrupt or trap .
but these experts , who were not at all versed in owen ’ s philosophy , valued the goods in money in the ordinary way , and then expressed those values in labour notes at the rate of 6_d._ for every hour ’ s work .
some values , such as existence , persistence , and rationality , are assumed to be 'real ' ; others are relegated to the 'ideal ' under the influence of natural science , special emphasis is laid on those values with which that science is engaged .
_ 186 von mangoldt_ distinguishes the coming into existence of free values of the production undertaken for an economic purpose .
each of these different ways of matching the half-lines together in pairs contributes exactly once , regardless of the values of the k 's , by wick 's theorem .
so , too , what appeared to be the vapour densities of sal-ammoniac , phosphorus pentachloride , sulphuric acid , calomel , and of other substances that might be mentioned , were not in accordance with the values demanded by other well-ascertained facts .
[ sidenote : effect on values of shifting centers of power and materials ] a great displacement of local values must accompany this shifting of the centers of power and materials .
a woman values that. ” but there were reasons why we could not find a lock fit to send .
signals can be either analog , in which case the signal varies continuously according to the information , or digital , in which case the signal varies according to a series of discrete values representing the information .
however , his unorthodox methods of teaching and his emphasis on values is met with stiff resistance from his students , who are only interested in improving their academic results .
western world in the quest for the best ways of promoting independent thought and the re-examination of accepted values to test their suitability to the needs of modern social organization .
these regression equations , therefore , also were derived using values of oxygen consumption expressed in terms of metabolic body mass ( mellen , 1963 ) .
hence , a design strategy was introduced in 2006 , to show that a metamaterial can be engineered with arbitrarily assigned positive or negative values of permittivity and permeability , which can also be independently varied at will .
it would be necessary to go deeply into capitalization , values behind this capitalization , cost of production , wages , transportation charges and so on .
in number theory , an average order of an arithmetic function is some simpler or better-understood function which takes the same values " on average " .
amperes various values have been assigned , from time to time , to the ohm or unit of resistance , the unit in use at the present time being known as the _international ohm_ .
her campaign focused on issues such as racial profiling , september 11 , 2001 attacks , and the green party 's 10 key values .
a calm , good hearted horse who values his friends .
in information theory , the principle of minimum fisher information ( mfi ) is a variational principle which , when applied with the proper constraints needed to reproduce empirically known expectation values , determines the best probability distribution that characterizes the system .
no man who values the safety and comfort of his companion will do anything to imperil either .
land values are twice what they are in the suburban cities of new york , such as brooklyn and jersey city , and twice what they are in the outlying wards of london .
this , however , can be accounted for by the fact that the power of the chiefs is limited , and that each indian values his own life highly and does not care to throw it away on a desperate enterprise .
all the other egyptian phonetic signs have _syllabic_ values , which are resolvable into combinations of the letters of the alphabet .
its basic story line comes from the cultural tradition of india and therefore it portrays the higher values of life .
trade was by barter , values being reckoned in oxen or in lumps of gold and silver .
the first chapter of this constitution establishes the south african commitment to democratic values , human rights and rule of law .
'to increase the care in creatures to preserve themselves , mature has given them an instinct , by which _every individual values itself above its real worth_ . '
since negative values were impossible and since the median was zero , this necessitated that the min value and first quartile would be as well .
hitchens. -- dealers do not pay premiums at present on any columbians except the dollar values .
such changes challenge our values and attitudes , and make many wonder about the miserable state of morality .
indirect bandgap materials such as silicon have minimum electron and hole energies at different momentum values .
_coinage._—gradually these weights , for greater ease of transfer and for clearer understanding of values , became the basis of coinage .
so in the indian we must acknowledge a race of distinct and separate values that we can never wholly know or understand .
the total of the round points the player ( or pair ) has gained is calculated as the sum of values of the cards collected in the baza and the values of the declared combinations .
all such plans of reorganization should carefully respect existing railroad property values , unless the management of those railroads obstinately and uncompromisingly opposed all concessions necessary to the realization of the national interest .
in particular , the traditional and ethnic values emphasized are similar to those of white supremacist christian identity theology , but similar right-wing views have been developed by radically conservative sects of islam , judaism , hinduism , and buddhism .
researchers have characterized youth culture as embodying values that are " in conflict with those of the adult world " , despite the attitudes of many adults , there is not a consensus among researchers about whether youth subcultures hold different beliefs than adults do .
one of these results was the that the z-component of the angular momentum , the classical inclination of an orbit relative to the z-axis , could only take on discrete values , a result which seemed to contradict rotational invariance .
gold and silver are and must remain the standard of values .
the global system of equations has known solution techniques , and can be calculated from the initial values of the original problem to obtain a numerical answer .
isbn 978-0-85259-693-7 in 1861 a series of stamps in five values was issued inscribed estados unidos de nueva granada , or the united states of new granada .
there were widely held values , such as political corruption , corporate crime , child labor , conditions in slums and prisons , unsanitary conditions in food processing plants ( such as meat ) , fraudulent claims by manufacturers of patent medicines , labor racketeering , and similar topics .
more values can be found in thermodynamics , above .
we have so made the experiment that we can make the pressure-values whatever we choose -- let us call them the values of the _independent variable_ or _argument_ .
gold has led the values in this county with a total of thirty-nine and a half million dollars ; lead was a close second with over thirty-six million ; silver third , with over thirty and a half million .
most biomechanics research hypothesis involving baseball takes those parameters as key values that can determine the success of a hitter .
noögenic neuroses : a person can be emotionally disabled by serious conflicts between opposing personal , ethical , or religious values .
in acknowledging this , i own up to the new equality , based on heroic values , which this war has established .
if the dj desires , loop start and end points can be set manually to non musical values .
in a few years the losses due to the change are retrieved and the german business is creating values more efficiently than ever .
the assignment of these proportional values gives 1.68 + 1.77 , or 3.45 , as the duration of the first two intervals , and 1.81 for the pause , a ratio of 1.00:0.524 .
under this approach , one must choose a limited number of key conditional values of the moderator that will be examined .
for him social values and externals are ruling passions .
lusztig conjectures , which related the values of their polynomials at 1 with representations of complex semisimple lie groups and lie algebras , addressing a long-standing problem in representation theory .
it thus becomes important to know very exactly the cross-over values for cherry club and club vermilion .
one simple example is adding up the values of each character in the substring .
they can include re-alignments of the political spectrum and reassessments of fundamental values .
this celebration includes an assembly that highlights the core values of the mercy education and the giving of the catherine mcauley award , an award given to one senior student and one faculty member who best represents catherine mcauley .
paris now unattainable , the channel ports—dunkirk , calais and boulogne—still naked , and lastly antwerp , all reappeared in the field of values like submerged rocks when the tidal wave recedes .
in practice , actually observed quantities may cluster around multiple values .
we have spoken of the three values of stamps already treated as the '' first issue '' of canada .
for purposes of comparison , harmonized values are published by international labour organization ( ilo ) and by oecd .
who states that knowing the levels of serum electrolytes rarely changes the recommended treatment of children with diarrhea and dehydration , and furthermore , that these values are often misinterpreted .
these big series of pictures with a weird fun collection of people , shows one world with different kind of styles , ages , points of view , values , religions and imagination .
much of the argument on the subject of `` going '' values and other kindred elements of value consists of statements of theory and generalities , and may be said to be merely argument to support the theory that there is an intangible element of value .
the ti-89 is a calculator - so it uses a floating point representation for its internal numeric values .
on the other hand , a considerable part of land values both within and without cities is due , not to the community as a civil body , but to the community as a collection of individuals and groups of individuals .
the values which hipparchus took for these variables can be found in ptolemy 's almagest iv , 9 .
csr is , where is an array of the ( left-to-right , then top-to-bottom ) non-zero values of the matrix ; is the column indices corresponding to the values ; and , is the list of value indexes where each row starts .
family functioning is associated with the values of collectivism in the lebanese society .
nature is indifferent to values .
if we increase the exponent , we get an average value which depends more on the peak values of z .
more generally , although the kneser graph always contains cycles of length four whenever , for values of close to the shortest odd cycle may have nonconstant length .
pangs i shall occasionally feel ; but who that values one person above the rest of the world , does not ?
rankings were based on the total points and points awarded were restricted to integer values .
the values quoted in the article are more useful for the lay reader .
these five values could satisfy the postal tariffs for all distance and weight needs of the time .
a man who lives under the expectation of meeting christ as judge will desert the worldly standard of values for a higher standard .
you have got to learn that christianity comes to us not simply as a luxury but as a force , and no man who values christianity simply as a luxury which he possesses really gets the christianity which he tries to value .
soon he settled in haarlem , as engraver on copper , and produced works which retain high values .
these people exercise power within the set of inherited values that originated in a pragmatic context of hierarchy associated with literacy .
this is a time of challenge to our interests and our values and it 's a time that tests our wisdom and our skills .
this ensures that all decisions are reflective of environmental values , avoids potential delays , and eliminates potential future conflicts .
( 1950b ) , assuming that active-phase thermal conductance is 52 % higher than values determined during the inactive phase ( aschoff , 1981 ) .
if you are a quick and accurate judge of values , here is a means of livelihood under the most agreeable , gentlemanly and easy auspices .
although at the time it often seemed an unnecessary expenditure of effort in an already overcrowded day , one now values the records of the early days of one 's life on the coast .
[ sidenote : values and horizontal value lines ] _value_ is that quality by which we may distinguish a dark hue from a light one .
they show the most incongruous backgrounds , frames of the most incredible malformations , floors that are either bare or loudly carpeted and pictures that are hung without the slightest consideration for their colour values .
algebraically we treat u as being of the form a + bx , where a and b are constants determined by the values of u at the extremities of the interval through which we interpolate .
grooming at the sikh missionary college the sikh youth with inherent potential to become accomplished preachers , ragis , dhadis and poets so that the propagation of sikhism , its tenets and traditions and its basic religious values could be taken up more effectively and vigorously .
wikipedia with slightly differing values - we reach a common value ( a community ethic ) by the interaction of these .
his design may be as interesting , his key as aptly chosen , his black and white ( values ) as colorful , his composition in the space as distinguished .
what are the reasons for the change in the normal values of manufactured and of agricultural commodities , respectively , during the progress of society ?
his change to a ceo instead of an educator could be interpreted as a wish to make the educational experience everything that it should be so who am i to say that he is a derelict to values i was attracted to .
figuratively speaking , the total social security accounts consist of a sub-structure and a superstructure , with the sub-structure comprising the absolute value of the revenues and expenditures and the superstructure the indicators into which the absolute values can be processed .
discontinuous timecode , and flywheel processingtimecodes are generated as a continuous stream of sequential data values .
the above figures are only applicable to the particular sample used ; other samples containing different excesses of base would yield different hydrolytic values .
-- steam chest , the box or chamber from which steam is distributed to the cylinder of a steam engine , steam pump , etc. , and which usually contains one or more values ; -- called also valve chest , and valve box .
america does stand up for its values .
the attributes of reality , in our world of values , are goodness , truth , and beauty .
we must find lasting values around which to build a humane life .
it becomes one of the deepest questions in the world what connection there is between man ’ s spiritual values or ideals and the eternal nature of things in the universe .
financial reporting fraud , including non-disclosure and deliberate falsification of values also contributes to users ' information risk .
to determine the number of days in a specific time period ( yellow fields ) , the values of the coloured fields above are added , reaching an intermediate sum .
in most programming languages , all values have a type explicitly declared at compile time , limiting the values a particular expression can take on at run-time .
nations seek them long after they represent real values .
the calculations are performed in the " scientific realm " of thermodynamics ( activities , speciation , log k values , ionic strength , etc .
iiuic this condition is equivalent to the values of q ( t ) being confined to a fixed subfield isomorphic to c , so it is rather a degenerate case .
legal values are not `` absolute '' values , in the sense that everybody obeys the law , but laws as well as lawlessness affect economic values .
the alsf aims to bring together liberal-leaning students and promote their beliefs and values on university campuses .
dyán , like lance , spoke little and pondered much on the talk of these men , whose straight speech and thoughts were refreshing as their own sea breezes after the fumes of rhetoric , the fog of false values that had bemused his brain these three years .
in modern counters , four parameters ( rbc count , hemoglobin concentration , mcv and rdw ) are measured , allowing others ( hematocrit , mch and mchc ) to be calculated , and compared to values adjusted for age and sex .
negative values of [ eta ] must be interpreted by a streaming motion on a parallel plane at a level slightly different , as on a double riemann sheet , the stream passing from one sheet to the other across a cut ss´ joining the foci s , s´ .
since their attitude is different from that of the militarist who would place violence itself high in his scale of values , it would pay us to consider their position .
there are three characteristics of these filters that should be known in order to understand the parameter values that an instrument may calculate .
we of course may have to add further fitness values such as minimizing costs however each constraint that we add greatly increases the search space and lowers the number of solutions that are good matches .
you can easily give specific values for a specific particle pair - electron and electron , or two sodium ions .
the values are fixed thus : -- pieces or crowns of 6 francs to be worth 4s .
four percentage values are given ( 83 .
mean values of snout-vent lengths of males from other localities are : río pastaza drainage , ecuador 73.8 mm , surinam 67.7 mm , río ucayali drainage , perú 57.6 mm , and guyana 55.5 mm .
`` i hope she values 'em accordingly , '' said auntie indignantly .
the total values of the imports of dairy produce of all kinds -- butter , margarine , cheese , & c. -- into the united kingdom were , at five-year intervals between 1875 and 1890 , the following : -- 1875 .
second—i urged a thorough revision of our laws touching the assessment and equalization of taxes , so as to secure , if possible , uniform values , and a material reduction of the percentage of taxation .
and he who hath to be a creator in good and evil -- verily , he hath first to be a destroyer , and break values in pieces .
compare these values with that for ordinary window glass , which is only 1 .
this honor recognizes the individuals whose actions serve as a model for quality values and goodness in the oklahoma city community .
these arise , for example , in the context of a { flag } that should actually be able to assume *three* values -- - such as yes , no , or unknown .
logan quickly bonds with jack and values her as his only friend .
arb _ depth _ texturearb _ shadow textures which store depth values , rather than color values .
you and i , as citizens , have the obligation to shape the debates of our time -- not only with the votes we cast , but with the voices we lift in defense of our most ancient values and enduring ideals .
and is it not from the low values in nature that we receive our sensation of sorrow ?
the algorithm exploits the fact that if two strings are equal , their hash values are also equal .
`` ) , and hold faulty values ( `` win , even if you have to climb over others. '' ) .
these truth values can then be used to determine how the brakes should be controlled .
the inverse x ( f ) may not exist because the cumulative distribution function has intervals of constant values .
in other words , the magnitude of the values of quantities and prices should not affect the price index .
there are ideals that some associate with the west , and there are many who consider western values to be universally superior .
only her sense of values restrained her from ordering up a bottle of champagne .
improved values of astronomical constants .
now , from _two_ equations only , we can not find , _separately_ , the values of _three_ unknowns : certain _combinations_ of them may , however , be found .
in a digital signal , the information is encoded as a set of discrete values ( for example , a set of ones and zeros ) .
although grid-controlled mercury-arc valves bear a superficial resemblance to triode valves , mercury-arc valves cannot be used as amplifiers except at extremely low values of current , well below the critical current needed to maintain the arc .
those commodities of america are new values , new equivalents , introduced into hungary and poland , to be exchanged there for the surplus produce of these countries .
a calculus for the manipulation of truth values ( t and f ) .
there may be drawn a sharp distinction between what is really mining and what is the subsequent treatment of the ores for the extraction of values .
we have the values and also we have terms that are as good as the values .
the other women considered the lace much too old and yellow to be worn , but mrs. dix was proud both of the lace and her own superior sense of values .
threshold values mark the emergence of new sign processes .
we can see quite well that our opinions of what is noble and good , our moral valuations , are powerful levers where action is concerned ; but we must begin by refining these opinions and independently creating for ourselves new tables of values .
unfortunately , not everything the west proposes as a theoretical vision or as a concrete lifestyle reflects gospel values .
doob set out the mental context of propaganda by discussing motivation , attitudes , stereotypes , personality , and values .
these values may be called the ‹equivalent partial conductivities› or ‹mobilities› of the ions in this solution .
there is nothing objectionable in this method of determining values ; it is , after all , only a matter of accounts .
an ethical job is a broad term to describe a job which accords with a person 's ethics or values .
cmyk form ( despite the rgb and html values being correct ) [ the hsv values i saw no point in , i have not checked if they are accurate equivalents ] .
as a default a win is worth 2 points and a loss 1 point , these values can be overwritten to what you need by and .
dividing each element in the kernel by the sum of all the absolute values of the elements in the kernel .
people in the world lose the values of life by having too much choice ; too much choice -- of things not worth having .
roman catholic beliefs and values .
the dramatic values of life depend upon the quality of the imagination .
all that analysis can reasonably be expected to do is to give the relative values of different samples of the same substance , or at the most , of materials of the same class .
draw first a few lines suggesting the growth of the fern , then add the strokes letting the fern dictate the direction , accenting the lighter values by a stronger pressure .
furthermore , the journal attempts to include a broad focus on " larger theoretical and policy connections , " which emphasize questions about the role of the military in sustaining democratic values .
property damage , considering values in that early day , was tremendous for a small island—estimated at more than seven million dollars .
421-422 ) says for instance , with regard to genuine conflicts of values : “ it is a fateful error to believe that such problems can be solved on principle in theory .
in that case , please give rosamund the ruby ring in the presence of my other relatives , and , although i lay no command upon her in the matter , tell her , if she values the memory of old geoffrey rutherford , not to sell the ring .
uccellini and the ncdc nesis values for the same storm can be found here .
i have been able to select the parent plants after their death on the sole ground of these values .
indeed , it might be worth while to try to see whether a scientific order of values might not be constructed according to a scale of numbers and measures representing energy .
in a 2007 web video , smith refers to " the values that make us republicans , that make us conservatives " .
the use of the psalms for responsive readings in our modern church services is a definitely practicable way of utilizing their liturgical and spiritual values .
the signing of the treaty and his subsequent banishment caused choi to re-initiate traditional uijong jeoksa movements among the people to revive confucian values and cast out western and japanese ideas .
typical values for a contact lens are from 8 .
chapter xxxii raising of values `` destiny is not about thee , but within , -- thyself must make thyself . ''
words will take on new values .
a thorough _education_ is indeed necessary to overcome this attitude ; we must master and control our own wills , if we would bring ourselves into relation with the external world and appreciate its values .
unlike most western directors , peckinpah tended to concentrate on the early 20th century rather than the 19th , and his films portray characters who still believe in the values of the old west being swept away by the new , industrial america .
in other words , if location x received two different values a and b , in this order , from any two processors , the processors can never read location x as b and then read it as a .
majeed upheld the values of liberalism and modernism in islam and called for the return of ijtihad ( freedom of thought ) in islamic traditions .
maurer. -- the $ 1 values of u. s. postage-stamps are largely used to pay postage on packages of bonds sent from the u. s. to europe .
since the 1980s , the political groups of the parliamentary right have joined forces around the values of economic liberalism and the building of europe .
the wea is uniquely positioned as a representative voice ; advancing evangelical values , addressing concerns and advocating for the marginalized .
and as painting is not and can not be the imitation of nature , but merely her artificial interpretation , since it has only at its disposal two out of three dimensions , the values are the only means that remain for expressing depth on a flat surface .
other possible values include physical formats such as , , , and for books , normally it is not necessary to specify or , as this should be obvious from the rest of the citation if no format is specified .
the sport was a simple affair and was based upon each community 's values for physical ability .
( this usage is not even particularly fanciful ; the use of a debugger sometimes alters a program's operating environment significantly enough that buggy code , such as that which relies on the values of uninitialized memory , behaves quite differently . )
in both cases , the academic and part-time amateur publisher was the loser in a fraught relationship with a tough , commercial world operating on a very different scale of values .
a single vector instruction consists of four 32-bit single-precision floating-point values which are distributed to the four single-precision ( 32-bit ) fmac units for processing .
the measure of values function is the great static function of money .
if two events happen at the same time in the frame of the first observer , they will have identical values of the t-coordinate .
for some parameter values it may even exhibit quasiperiodic or chaotic behaviour .
apart from some philosophy of values the conception of progress has little meaning .
the difference between the two values thus obtained , divided by the value of the shunt resistance , will give the value of the current .
the resulting values are sa , sq , sz , .
in addition , if i have made any mistakes with any of the phonemic values given on that page , please let me know .
internalising these values the child forms an ego ideal .
he will find that what he lacks in common with all , who have not bottomless purses , are just the rare denominations or values , or types , of which he may probably possess examples substantially identical -- perhaps in superior condition .
it aims to reflect what it considers as syrian collective values , culture and daily life .
that the process mean appears to be unstable is reflected in the relatively low values for pp and ppk .
slowly but surely , he thought the values of christianity and judaic traditions had done their work in the minds of men .
intel with best-case values as low as 0 .
rugaard castle lies in a hilly and forest covered landscape with lakes bordering the sea and can be seen as idyllic and holding substantial natural values .
true virtue is thus right action proceeding from a rational comprehension of true values .
the committee is responsible for recommending financial policies , goals , and budgets that support the mission , values , and strategic goals of the university .
we may discern , too , even in these rude schemes a nascent sense of values , of a selection of what is characteristic .
the `` values '' were next run down into smaller vats and treated with zinc shavings , precipitating a 50 per cent .
however , we can make related definitions for negative and fractional values of x .
virtew is the standard ov values .
even the most purely utilitarian of values are nevertheless values ; not _mere_ existences .
in early 2004-05 , manitoba 's labour-managed crocus investment fund stopped trading and was forced into receivership after reports that it had misled shareholders and overstated the values of its assets .
specify the size of the radial using keywords or css size values .
the four areas branch out and include values like humility , hardwork , honesty , kindness , righteousness , sincerity and charity .
however , the banknotes were not tied to the coinage and their values floated relative to one another .
to reflect upon the beginning of the universe or upon the mind means to constitute oneself , together with the appropriate language , in a pragmatic context different from community interaction , cultural values , or national characteristics .
in this work , she attempts to situate the various liberal , conservative , and other views of " values " within her " metametatheory " of contingencies , an economics-influenced theoretical approach .
he had not realized as he scrawled those words what a pitiful bauble it was but now it was necessary to endow it with values that he could not truly feel .
money , comparative values of , xlii-xlviii , 81 , 92 and _n_ , 154 , 239 , 242 , 243 and _n_ , 245 and _n_ , 257 and _n_ , 269 .
sub-groups consistently share values and assumptions about work .
it 's a nifty way to generate sine and cosine values .
-- that 's good ; but still , the picture as a whole , the values , -- pah !
y and x when the values of z1 , .
however , edward feser emphasized that libertarianism does not require individuals to reject traditional conservative values .
fcc id , then you can , eventually , find reported sar values , one by one .
my daughter values much your remembrance of her , and prays to have her respects presented to the ladies and yourself .
update the internal state x with the sequence of n gf ( q ) first generated values ( q1 ( x ) , .
you were far above me in fitness for the general superintendency , both in worldly talent of administration , and far more in the spiritual qualifications which god values in a superior .
_comparative accuracy._ -- central-difference formulae are usually more accurate than advancing-difference formulae , whether we consider the inaccuracy due to omission of the `` remainder '' mentioned in the last paragraph or the error due to the approximative character of the tabulated values .
`` but when you have a ready-made stock-market fortune handed to you , and a gorgeous girl wife , and the world comes to fawn upon you -- you soon become intoxicated with a false sense of your own achievements and values .
c ) and ph values of 2 .
depending on the values of x , y and z etc .
reason lives among these represented values , all of which have their cerebral seat and present efficacy over the passing thought ; and reason teaches this passing thought to believe in and to respect them equally .
in 1978 he and wagner created " strontium dog " , a sci-fi western about a bounty hunter in a future where mutants are an oppressed minority forced into doing such dirty work , for starlord , a short-lived sister title to 2000 ad with higher production values .
as one grows older one values silence more -- maybe a gentle providence , that in the end the great silence may not be unwelcome .
in this year , the grandchildren of lambert , of the hunt-poznan family , small derž ( ders ) and demeter captured litava and robbed values of 3000 marks and charters .
a purely natural system of units has all of its units defined in this way , and usually such that the numerical values of the selected physical constants in terms of these units are exactly 1 .
the values of the paper moneys have fallen in all the countries , especially in germany and russia .
they had the happy knack of selecting exactly the right tonal values so that difficult colour combinations , ( such as red and green laid side by side as the cloth and lining of a cloak ) appear inevitable .
pessimism , moreover , may possess different values .
there must be an abandonment of the old slave-morality and a transvaluation of moral values .
and i don 't think we 've had a president in recent memory who has been so able to keep his policies centered in values .
so even the existance of many of the passages in the article ( where rape is not stated , but interpreted as existing through the lens of modern values ) could be considered original research .
as one of the manifestations of the class conflict , the everett tragedy can not be considered apart from that age-long and world-wide struggle between the takers of profits and the makers of values .
bases of greater or less length had their proper values assigned them ; although mere notes of passage , which bore no proper harmony , were generally disregarded .
those who are acquainted with 'feudal values ' among the arabs will understand what that means .
an angle is a familiar example of a mode of magnitude with no real immeasurable values .
but music is color and warmth , which are the values of a concrete art .
the values are the total hits ( pages , graphics , page edits , etc .
land values rise with increasing population .
if the instance is an image , the feature values might correspond to the pixels of an image ; if the instance is a piece of text , the feature values might be occurrence frequencies of different words .
for example , it might study what constitutes upbringing and education , the values and norms revealed through upbringing and educational practices , the limits and legitimization of education as an academic discipline , and the relation between education theory and practice .
he espouses a right-wing philosophy with compassionate social values .
like many other strident artists , cueto rejected traditional values and religious conventions .
nokes lightfoot is so nimble , and values himself so much upon it , that i have thoughts of making him huntsman to a pack of beagles , and give his land to somebody that will stay upon it .
the only way in which reform can be fairly carried out is to buy back the land , including in the purchase price any surplus values upon which the present proprietors have set their hopes .
however much sun and his teachings failed to create a new political islam , they weathered criticism sufficiently well to provide a scheme of policy , political values , and broad objectives .
the type system knows how to copy , assign , and destroy values belonging to any of the registered types .
or has it ever been proposed to estimate the values of commodities at different periods by the different quantities of cloth and profits worked up in them ?
[ 2 ] this is the position of the idealistic schools and is adopted in professor sorley 's recently published gifford lectures , `` moral values and the idea of god . ''
in addition to the localized jump method described above , there exists a second algorithm for choosing " k " using the same transformed distortion values known as the broken line method .
this story , which was first published in 1941 by new life publisher , affirmed nam cao 's talent and showed deeply human values .
avoid negative color coordinate values prompted the change from to rg to xy .
there is a general perception that rental values for owner-occupied homes tend to be assessed as being lower than their actual true market rental value .
the formula is very cumbrous , its form is not rationally justifiable and it is not at all clear that it gives more accurate values of the discharge than simpler formulae .
i suppose , by the way , that something of a point could be made against the single tax at this point : destroying land values would lessen the security which a community could offer outside lenders .
gram repeated to us a proverb in rhyme which set forth the relative values of swarms .
list the evidences that modern society values men as such apart from economic utility or standing , or show that it does not so value them .
the results of sixty series on subject _hs_ give the values of average _et_ as 4.8 secs .
labor and capital would thus not merely gain what is now taken from them in taxation , but would gain by the positive decline in rent caused by the decrease in speculative land values .
this is especially a problem for compiler-writers , because their generated code needs places to store temporaries for things like intermediate values in expression evaluation .
process for process sake is against the core values of wikipedia .
canadian values , is a prerequisite to acting responsibly as a nation .
“ it is possible that sometime in the future the outside world may discover that it will have need to come to us for the values that are ours through our great moral inheritance of loyalty .
there is no cash used in these transactions ; the skins are handed over to the trader , who values them from a standard of a white fox skin .
they can not supply the goods except for a price , indeed not except for a remunerative price , a price which will add something to the capital values which they are venturing in their various enterprises .
in the meanwhile , land evaluators started to demand bribes to refrain from assessing higher values for land value taxes .
as explained in a previous section , this is because the value of the constants in planck 's law have been slightly changed since the definition of these canonical illuminants , whose spds are based on the original values in planck 's law .
i am not here passing judgment on moral values themselves in the light of any ideal standard , but simply describing the manner in which moral values function .
) , a rheostat consisting of a box or case containing a number of resistance coils of standard values so arranged that they can be combined in various ways to afford more or less resistance .
mr. clewes gave me to understand i was to use my own judgment about picture values .
i read in an article that quantam energy compulsion is caused by the diminutive release of the particle decobodification through homosapions and large values of hydrocronic electric plasums but acourding to theoritical quantum sulfur theory almost all mast produced hydrocronic electricity is by far indeginable .
we can also show that the possible values of the observable in any state must belong to the spectrum of .
even with great care , the methods of extraction and drying always produce considerable decomposition ; and in some cases the phosphorus and nitrogen contents bear but little relation to the theoretical values .
this can be of general importance when calculating the values required for filters used in the control of signal transmission systems , to ensure that the entire bandwidth of the desired signal is allowed to pass .
the exponent d may be further generalized to negative and fractional values .
while although negative , it is equally potent , on _its_ side of the equation , to alter the values and manifestations of dominance .
it is celebrated by bishop michael neary , who speaks of consumer values that he feels are seducing society .
they have been influenced by ideas and values from abroad , particularly by those emanating from france .
_the order of rank : _ he who _determines_ values and leads the will of millenniums , and does this by leading the highest natures -- he _is the highest man._ 1000 .
but do n't mix the values .
the values from 1/2 cent through 5 cents were printed in sheets of 100 , ten rows of ten .
colors reflect distribution but not location or values .
when the differences of successive values of x are not equal , the above principle still applies , provided the differences are adjusted in a particular way .
however , it is noted that the pwp values under field conditions are not constant for any given soil but are determined by the integrated effects of plant , soil , and atmospheric conditions .
on mn as base describe two rectangles , of which the heights are the greatest and least values of y which correspond to points on the arc pq of the curve .
how can the instantaneous values be recorded ? = ans .
therefore : in any combination which includes a number of exchanges on one square , all you have to do is to count the number of attacking and defending units , and to compare their relative values ; the latter must never be forgotten .
the specific gravity is highest in anthracite and lowest in lignite , bituminous coals giving intermediate values ( see table i. ) .
home , school , church , state , civilization , are measured in one supreme scale of values , viz. , whether and how , for they aid in bringing youth to its fullest maturity .
the ore is oxidized , and we can save ninety per cent , of the values on amalgamating plates without concentrating or cyaniding machinery .
what if his human values were really wrong ?
newtownabbey community high school values the place of extra-curricula activities .
most typical raster formats cannot store hdr data ( 32 bit floating point values per pixel component ) , which is why some relatively old or complex formats are still predominant here , and worth mentioning separately .
each of these provinces is capable of producing great values and making rich and powerful almost beyond belief .
let us , by our example , teach them to obey the law , respect our neighbors , and cherish our values .
other methods , more refined than the one just described have given accurate values for the speed of sound .
voici , en effet , quelles ont été jusqu ' à présent les récompenses qu ' a values à m. thomas de colmar la merveilleuse création sur laquelle nous n'avons plus rien à dire .
table xxix. -- all or ordinary , less quiet day hourly values ( + to the west ) .
existence values are unable to be assessed through market pricing mechanisms , so contingent valuation surveys were suggested to assess them .
the value of telegraph stamps extended to fifty rupees , but it was considered sufficient to add three new values to the postage stamps for use upon the more expensive telegrams , namely 10 , 15 and 25 rupees .
the metric describes a spacetime whose equal-time slices are spatially flat , however space is expanding or contracting at different rates in different directions , depending on the values of the p _ j .
the fundamental belief of metaphysicians is the belief in antitheses of values .
the nation is now on its trial , to be tested , as to whether it adequately values the divine gift of the union .
the authority strives to reflect certain key values as the characteristics of the people who are the caafi team and equally for the organization as a whole by professionalism , accountability , commitment , and integrity in our conduct .
the long vowel aa has values centring on ; long ii has values centring on ; and long oo has values centring on .
the organization had a mission to gather serbs in immigration and offer help , as well as keeping ethnic and cultural values .
tong claims that the concept of a prosperity gospel , equates worldly gains with the blessings of god and that chc validates the values of its middle class congregation who are " keen [ on ] accumulating material and cultural assets " as part of their identity .
first will i win to us each citizen who prizes liberty and values most the public honor and his country 's weal .
the library ensures their right on free access to information and world cultural values .
this blatantly discernible ineptitude provokes the '' natives '' into a wholesale rejection of the west , its values and its culture .
mcinnes has spoken in many of his media appearances about the museum and its work and the importance of democratic values and civics education .
an essay in genealogy ( 2002 ) , attempts to defend a non-foundationalist attachment to the values of truth , which williams identifies as accuracy and sincerity , by giving a vindicatory naturalistic genealogy of them .
zeitschr. , 1868 , 230 ) conditions the notion of productiveness by the presence of a superfluity of values .
unamended christadelphians believe that a correct understanding of god 's plan , a life lived in accordance with god 's values and christ 's commandments , and baptism into christ 's name are necessary for salvation .
once this happens radios resort to their programmed information which contains timing values that determine what to do once the timer runs out and there is still no control channel ( signal " out of range , " switch sites , etc .
however , with code modification , to the template for calculating the statistics could be added as appropriate the code for skipping unwanted values , and for applying weights .
the density fields have dual automatic unit conversion meaning that if only metric values are entered , the imperial values will be automatically converted and vice versa .
an inquiry into the nature of the self ; beliefs and values ; personal , physical , mental , social and spiritual health ; human relationships including families , friends , communities , and cultures ; rights and responsibilities ; what it means to be human .
studies of contemporary indigenous environmental management , including agro-forestry practices among itza maya in guatemala and hunting and fishing among the menominee of wisconsin , suggest that longstanding " sacred values " may represent a summary of sustainable millennial traditions .
for example , the landscape artist can not reproduce the range of values or brightnesses in most of nature 's scenes , for if black is used to represent a deep shadow , white is not bright enough to represent the value of the sky .
while when the difference of relative values between one tone and another is slight , the oneness of effect is not so much interfered with by there being a large number of them .
hence the necessity of closely correlating the result of the count of red blood corpuscles with the hæmoglobinometric and histological values .
furthermore , among all highly centralized nations , the regulation of the currency is one of the most jealously guarded of the prerogatives of sovereignty , because all values hinge upon the relation which the volume of the currency bears to the volume of trade .
fricative values for , , , and are not unlikely , but are not attested in boeotian at this time .
accumulation 11,155,000 surplus , by new york standard , 2,254,000 _cash surrender values .
sayce 's phonetic values and interpretations of determinatives are his best assured achievements .
one of its greatest values is its courage , for in it shaw says many things no one else would have dared to say .
stress on discipline and values .
sustainability marketing myopia is a term used in sustainability marketing referring to a distortion stemming from the overlooking of socio-environmental attributes of a sustainable product or service at the expenses of customer benefits and values .
-- we take pleasure in princes and in priests , because in big things , as in small , they actually uphold the belief in the difference of human values , even in the estimation of the past , and at least symbolically .
the player may also pass a turn , request a hint of one playable word , and see the tile values at any time through the use of a pull-down menu .
given that the goals and values of these two countries were shared by their respective communities on the island , the creation of an independent cypriot state " represented the narrow-middle ground between mutually exclusive ethnic policies and goals .
it is probable , however , that it is so great a stimulus to production that it defeats itself so far as the values of _units_ of goods are concerned .
a careful canvass of these values will develop literary discrimination and taste .
have some more views of values on the toboggan .
missing attribute values are simply not used in gain and entropy calculations .
agriculture has declined with the sprawl of the urban area and the resulting increases in land values .
fitzpatrick confirmed matthiessen 's chief result , and obtained values for the resistivity of hard-drawn copper which , when corrected for temperature variation , are in entire agreement with those of matthiessen at the same temperature .
science is not with us to promulgate values .
if only michael were here , how they would have argued and squabbled , to their souls ' content , over values , and proportions and effects of light and shade ; and what a fine day 's work would have sprung from it all !
it stimulates to a testing of values so that a teacher selects and adapts his material to the needs of the boys and girls whom he teaches .
they were forced by law , and by custom powerful as law , to pay monstrously inflated values for their lands .
the values of articles generally reckoned in money are about 10 per cent .
sociological study of universal value addresses how such values are formed in a society .
the school 's goal is to provide young women with an academic education in an environment of christian values and cultural diversity .
parents must study the power of play , its psychological and educational values , in order to direct its activity to the highest good .
we have said that religion must be catholic in its count of values .
we can represent the amplitude of the current and potential values along the aerial by the ordinates of a dotted line so drawn that its distance from the aerial represents the potential oscillation or current oscillation at that point ( see fig .
the path integral monte carlo method is a numerical approach for determining the values of heat capacity , based on quantum dynamical principles .
there were no woman worth so composd a man : their single share , their noblenes peculier to them , gives the prejudice of disparity , values shortnes , [ cornets .
in dressing ariel up in it he had returned to a forgotten freedom , —to a state where values were somehow different from his present values .
the creator of the duchesse de sanseverina had caught more than a glimpse of the transvaluation of all values .
however , if the goal is merely to display a sham image on a non-amiga platform , the required color values may be pre-calculated based on the palette entries that are programmed via the copper-list , regardless of whether the palette is modified in the middle of a scanline .
instead , segments are relative values in the dos exe file .
it is used because of its capability to express both very large and very small values of power in a short range of number ; e .
i also determined the relative values of the minimal intensity of stimulus , effective in causing transmission of excitation in the three cases .
here x is a vector of variables , x is a vector of values .
fate , indeed , seemed to have placed at her disposal everything which society most values , and to have enabled her to realize in an unusual degree what dr. johnson so happily described as `` the potentialities of wealth . ''
but when once the values come to consciousness , when once a socrates insists upon the organic relation of a reflective life and morality , then the means , the machinery by which ethical ideals are projected and manifested , comes to consciousness also .
nothing , that the heart of man values , is so secret ; nothing is so potent .
we should not directly compare the aic values of the two models .
economic value , e.g. , is a subspecies within the group of utility values -- '' goods '' include '' _pouvoirs_ , '' `` _droits_ , '' `` _mérites_ , '' and `` _richesses_ '' ( 66 ) .
another measure is the ansi contrast , in which the measurement is done with a checker board patterned test image where the black and white luminosity values are measured simultaneously .
the film was praised for its direction , screenplay , production values , cinematography , and the performances of tom hanks and barkhad abdi .
the sect is dualistic in that it believes in a material and spiritual division , but apparently it values both .
in july 2001 the buller water conservation order came into force , listing the waters of the buller river and tributaries that are to be retained in their natural state or protected because of the outstanding characteristics , features and values of the waters .
in order to ensure a high availability service it is possible to have multiple calendars in different physical locations all of which communicate with each other to ensure that each calendar contains identical hash values .
isopsephy ( ; isos meaning " equal " and psephos meaning " pebble " ) is the greek word for the practice of adding up the number values of the letters in a word to form a single number .
bob wade had an odd unformulated sense of values that bernald had learned to trust .
by the simple addition of a certain quantity of labour , new value is added , and by the quality of this added labour the original values of the means of production are preserved in the product .
the only native work on the writing that has come to light as yet is a fragmentary papyrus of roman date which has a table in parallel columns of hieroglyphic signs , with their hieratic equivalents and words written in hieratic describing them or giving their values or meanings .
serving the community is one of the main values of phi alpha mu as stated in the mission statement .
by combining number values associated with the letters and categories , new paths of insight and thought were created .
winter shows were intended to include a limited cast , a reduced orchestra , and simple production values .
there was an excessive number of small , weak banks in the grain-growing areas of eastern montana where the postwar slump wiped out land values and related loans .
in molecular networks , atoms can be constrained by radial 2-body bond-stretching constraints , which keep interatomic distances fixed , and angular 3-body bond-bending constraints , which keep angles fixed around their average values .
for example , suppose x is a discrete random variable with values xi and corresponding probabilities pi .
personal concerns motivated lat for his next foray into animation ; judging that western animation of the 1980s and 90s had negative influences , he wanted to produce a series for malaysian children that espoused local values .
but interest gives him courage to hazard all , who values money more than life itself .
for instance , taking quetelet ’ s values for the height in centimetres of a male infant from birth to four years old , as follows : years 0 1 2 3 4 cm .
in composition he hardly held his characters in group owing to a sacrifice of values , and in color he was often `` spotty , '' and lacking in the unity of mass .
buffer solutions are used extensively to provide solutions at or near the physiological ph for the study of biochemical reactions ; the design of these solutions depends on a knowledge of the pka values of their components .
to wellesley , yellow-cheeked from too many years in space , cynical from the paucity of human values in his life , aidennsport was the despised prototype of colonial stagnation about the galactic rim .
in the territory of chaco , in which especial interest was felt , as the lands in question bore forests of quebracho trees of great value ( the quebracho industry being then in vogue ) , higher values were obtained , representing five times the original sale price .
the expression upon his face , as he hurried forward in this manner , was the expression of a man who has everything he values at stake .
in data management and database analysis , a data domain refers to all the values which a data element may contain .
the lateral positions of the height values depend on the corresponding object point that is imaged by the pixel matrix .
the colours of the enamels which are used as flat values in backgrounds to the little silver figures , are dark rose , clear blue , and soft green .
envelopes were only produced in two values to cover the first weight class for both the local rate and the inland rate .
how should this be attained without a vigorous deepening of life , without the development of invisible values ?
the values of the client must be taken into account .
the greenwood statistic is a comparative measure that has a range of values between 0 and 1 .
the declaration nostra aetate by the second vatican council officially established inter-religious dialogue between catholics and hindus , promoting common values between the two religions ( among others ) .
american war led weaver , for the first time , to doubt that populist values would eventually prevail .
there is , first of all , the liberal , who regards christianity as a form of platonism resting on the idea of absolute values .
man at his best , that is to say , _believes in_ an invisible world of spiritual values , and he furnishes the final proof of his faith 's reality by sacrificing to it all lesser things .
the people of shakespeare 's day were also fastidious about perfume values -- something we do not think about to-day .
for lookups of keys with multiple values , additional values may be found by simply resuming the search at the next slot .
she was incarcerated with other japanese americans during world war ii and during this period was exposed to the quaker values of peace advocacy and nonviolent conflict resolution by friends working in camp .
if e has a gap in it larger than δ , the values on either side can differ by an arbitrarily large amount , so the function can vary more than nε .
recent observations give smaller values of both than those made between 1890 and 1900 , and there is no reason to suppose either to be constant .
do you know that a man values his life more than anything else he possesses , and that you have saved mine ?
but such pleasures fall without the aesthetic field in the absence of any objectification ; they are pleasures of exercise , and the objects involved are not regarded as the substances in which those values inhere .
this steady advance engendered a speculative advance , which , with the railroad era , ran up land values in every direction .
his treatment of the economic and educational values of the labor organizations is masterly and explicit , evincing a thorough understanding of the great principles upon which our social fabric is based .
but , if so , we must agree with nietzsche in thinking that ethical values have become “ denaturalised. ” in their primitive forms the products of selection , they have , by a kind of internal momentum , overpassed their primitive purpose .
he values the infinitesimal in time , even as he does in space .
i found , for my test image , that google would recognise the image up to a value of 300 , which is subjectively very bleached out ( and i think is already past the point at which many values are being top clamped ) .
and he said : '' no , it isn ’ t : the thing that he values most in the world is mrs .
some immigrants assimilate smoothly into the white middle class of america , others experience downward assimilation , and others experience rapid economic success while preserving the values of their immigrant community .
he attempted to avoid cultural frictions by making a compromise with local customs that other missionaries viewed as conflicting with catholic values .
note that there is no difference between the lower and higher heating values for the combustion of carbon , carbon monoxide and sulfur since no water is formed in combusting those substances .
first editions and values .
it is only in the ideal fluid market assumed by static theory , where adjustments are instantaneous , where causal-temporal relations have become timeless logical relations , that values are perfectly expressed in prices .
the movement was controversial in the 1970s and 1980s , due to the founder 's hostility to traditional values , first in india and later in the united states of america .
we believe that only worldly education is not the real education , but education along with ethical values and spirituality is real education .
we are able to illustrate only two of these stamps , the ½ and 1 anna values .
payment is made by the use of coupons , their values being deducted from the employee ’ s salary .
on the contrary , by compelling those who hold land on speculation to sell or let for what they can get , a tax on land values tends to increase the competition between owners , and thus to reduce the price of land .
the two categories have different values .
the development of bumblebee models was motivated primarily by the discovery that mechanisms in string theory ( and subsequently other quantum theories of gravity ) can lead to tensor-valued fields acquiring vacuum expectation values .
all the values employed since are to be found on it .
symons was to be the beneficiary , and we higgled and haggled over the values of our _groschen_ and _sechser_ as if millions were at stake .
it is obvious that this motivation need not always be explained in terms of utilitarian values .
a proper appreciation of polished wood , the sanitary and aesthetic values of the open fire , a certain scheme in couch-pillows , all linked it to the dozen other rooms that occupied the same relative ground-floor corners in a dozen other houses .
reactions from irritation to euphoria confirmed our belief-assurance-attitude that there is need for an implementation of contemporary artistic practice which provides different access to social and cultural values , life styles , and new ideas , to elevate artistic taste and to provide specific interactions inside a social environment .
*wherever captain carter has used martian measurements of time , distance , weight , and the like i have translated them into as nearly their equivalent in earthly values as is possible .
in this example , both military and societal values are targets .
while young , her father moved the family to cornwall , although she spent her childhood in a small indian singaporean community around the goodman road area in singapore and was brought up with traditional asian values .
aircraft noise in the area can be significant , which lowers property values compared with many of the surrounding villages .
-- '' false estimates of values , vehement striving for what hinders rather than helps our spiritual development . ''
amongst the ancient irish there was a keen knowledge of color and an exceptional appreciation of color values .
start with the total non-personal wealth of the country , subtract from it the share-values of the small stockholders ; the values of all bonds , mortgages and notes ; the property of the small tradesman and the small farmer ; the value of homes -- what remains ?
in the latter case the salt may possess two values of solubility at the same temperature .
it 's also possible to find values for sine that is a multiple of 5 degrees , e .
=approximation of scoring rings.= -- concentric rings marked on an instructional target and possessing various values which afford a simple means of comparing the shooting errors of individuals , but having no relation to the vulnerable surfaces of the ordinary service targets .
to the writer the argument is not sound , in that it fails to recognize the element of human energy in resource values .
the phenomenal mists and rains of this first april of the new century caused such a dearth of golden lights in the world that a yellow chicken acquired peculiar values .
and these reasons are independent of the fact that the painting of both greece and egypt in their best period are based entirely upon colour and line technique free from all values and chiaroscuro .
i have distributed their modern values to _i_ , _j_ , _u_ , _v_ , _w_ .
the proposal of the single tax on land values .
her standards were confused , her whole sense of values disturbed .
the following are some of the values deduced by well-known experimentalists for the latent heat of fusion : -- regnault , 79.06 to 79.24 calories , corrected by person to 79.43 ; person , 79.99 calories ; hess , 80.34 calories ; bunsen , 80.025 calories .
_score-card -- filberts_ general values : size 15 form 5 color 5 shell values : thinness 15 kernal values : plumpness 10 freedom from fibre 10 color 5 flavor 15 quality 20 -- -- 100 note : for insect or fungous injuries deduct 5-10 points .
`` when i heard of your majesty 's growing admiration for the lady who was fortunate enough to save your life , '' he began , `` i looked for her name and her mother 's in a book which the english nation values next to the bible .
the barbarian was a person or a nation without a spiritual sense in his values .
the ipa has a close working relationship with each of these independent organisations and values them highly , but they are not officially or legally part of the ipa .
the ancient monument is now often seen as secondary to the modern path , and heritage advice about individual dyke sections is not generally coordinated via any connected overview of the values of the whole monument .
values it is true , literary and poetical values especially , were no longer what they had been in the days of the late queen .
it had all seemed jolly enough up at the sanatorium , but when he was back in the house , and life reëstablished its old values , he began to regret it very heartily .
he seemed to know as much as the custodian about melrose and the douglas heart -- which was natural , as he so values everything connected with his family name .
all values are continually being revised , and tested anew .
further , if the alternations take place so slowly that the full maximum and minimum values of the magnetization are reached in the intervals between the reversals , there will again be no dissipation of energy .
the '' genealogy of morals '' is devoted to the exposition of a favourite theory of nietzsche 's , that there have always been two antithetical codes of moral values , that of `` masters '' and that of `` slaves . ''
these values are in the normal limits .
there is even one for currency when the monetary values are at par .
so long as there are things worth while , there will be spiritual values .
in the table xvi. -- average values of fresh meat , bacon and hams imported into the united kingdom , 1891-1905 -- per cwt .
the editors estimate subjects ' wealth from a range of public information , based on values at january each year .
vojvodina is a region in which traditional multiculturalism is preserved , and other european principles and values .
while wuas show a significant increase in cost recovery , especially when compared to low values in areas under state management , a high subsidy from the government still contributes to cover operation and maintenance costs in their systems .
but its functions as a common denominator of values and as a standard of deferred payment are increasingly important in an advancing society .
if some information is contentious , we go from that on a case-by-case basis with official values presented as accurate .
the great problem of the first year of the war was a problem of manufacture and training , the problem , indeed , of the creation of values .
the opera is a satire on the aesthetic movement of the 1870s and ' 80s in england , part of the 19th-century european movement that emphasised aesthetic values over moral or social themes in literature , fine art , the decorative arts , and interior design .
i approaches these limiting values .
the people elect their institutions to preserve their identity and values , defend national unity and independence , and guarantee respect to the human rights as the ones defined in the constitution .
communists like tolstoy demand that art express only those feelings that are already common , the religious and moral ; they would exclude all values that have not become those of the race .
1573 , s. v. _nauci : all trifling things that are of no values : as the pyll of an apple : the paring of ones nayle_ , etc .
he was a fairly good barometer of the daily land values .
he values little those gifts that he receives .
the total increase in land values in america since the days of the pioneers equals , of course , the present value of its land , since it was acquired by our forefathers without payment , or with only a nominal fee to the indians .
ip addresses are the dotted decimal equivalents of four 8 bit values , 258 is an impossible .
it is a real philosophy of life , a standard of values , a criterion of all possible postulates , and as its loss meant the world 's peril , so its recovery may mean its salvation .
his work consists in interpreting this _more_ , and we have already seen whither the _more_ leads us : it leads us into spiritual norms and their values , and these in their turn led us into infinite love in the godhead .
he condemns the employment of women in industry , and demands that woman should return to her “ particular sphere , ” the only one where she creates “ real values , ” the home and the family .
the other values can be calculated by mediawiki .
all values from crc refer to room temperature .
now , if food is the only source of body substance , you see that you must study that question , and that is what i will give you -- some lessons on foods and their values .
in some cases efficient approximation algorithms can be obtained by computing a discrete subset of values and interpolating for intermediate input values , since interpolation is also a linear operation .
the overarching goal of real women is to support the way of life traditionally associated with the 1950s nuclear family and arch-conservative values .
that which the public values undergoes a change .
in the foreigner universe , cherryh explores the interface between humans and atevi , whose language relies on numerical values , causing the main character , bren cameron , to constantly calculate as he speaks the atevi language , ragi .
many hailed it to be a masterpiece , praising the realism , interactive world , and production values , though it also sharply divided several critics who found it self-indulgent and criticized it for its slow pace and lack of action .
the rationale in the treasury report accompanying the draft bill was that to mint a gold dollar and a silver dollar with different intrinsic values was problematic ; as the silver dollar did not circulate and the gold did , it made sense to drop the unused coin .
and yet the more sensitive and richly endowed among the followers of mary baker eddy have found in christian science other values than these .
it values every least manifestation of his nature , because it considers each one sacred ; but it values even more the coordination and harmony of all .
the source code for ezquake explicitly looks for the checksum values of models included in razerpak .
conservative roundtable discusses what it perceives as liberal threats to freedom and highlights conservative values and solutions .
since its published goal is to modify facts to reflect unification church values , this " encyclopedia " should never be considered a reliable source of information .
this corroborates my statement , inasmuch as it shews that condition does not form so influential a factor abroad in determining values , as it does at home .
the effect of ibs is to cause a change in the equilibrium values of the emittances .
such a situation naturally puts a premium on white blood in the minds of negroes , and therefore puts a prize on bastardy , discouraging any tendency to cultivate pure racial values on the part of the blacks themselves .
she represented the state before the supreme court in significant constitutional , administrative and criminal law cases in which she was influential in protecting democratic values .
to overcome this problem the sequence of values is divided into small blocks of equal size that are compressed separately .
i will first take their relative values during ancient times .
this they do , ( 1 ) by affecting the quantities of _objects_ of value , and so modifying the marginal relations among the value-scales and the marginal values ; ( 2 ) by affecting the lives of the people directly , and so modifying the value-scales themselves .
he was just a professional lawyer-politician who had lost his sense of values ... . how was _i_ to know ? ...
but all these are only preliminary conditions for his task ; this task itself demands something else -- it requires him to create values .
one object of such investigation is to find unit values for strength and stiffness , etc .
according to her movie profile , alex chose the yellow color for her spy uniform because it symbolizes strength she values her friendship with sam and clover the most and will do anything to keep their team together and happy .
roman culture had distinct values on human life which are very different from those now prevailing in europe and , in general , in the world .
for example using the national information exchange model ( niem ) the data element name would be persongendercode and the enumerated values would be male , female and unknown .
labour , it is to be added , was cheap compared to food values .
the following values were found : [ 191 ] pharm .
depending on the method you are asked to use , your formula will have different values for a , b , c , and d - and no values will likely produce the exact values from the plot points .
frame and then instantiating and refining various values as appropriate .
as a consequence , some of control structures are expressions that yield values .
+hues first appeal to the child , values next , and chromas last.+ ( 26 ) color education begins with ability to recognize and name certain hues , such as red , yellow , green , blue , and purple ( see paragraphs 182 and 183 ) .
units such as cavalry and aeroplanes have high reconnaissance values and are intended to be used as scouts .
they model economically observable values over time .
another criticism is that the relative value determinations of the parties cannot reflect the actual values sought by the parties unless the parties start off at equal economic positions .
and tell her , as she loves both him and me , -- as she values her place here at brockhurst , -- she is not to speak . ''
it does no harm to integrate over the values of f , since it only determines the choice of gauge .
in response , the republican movement argued that removing references to the queen was not " republicanism by stealth " but simply reflected the contemporary values of new zealanders .
the redefined relationship between the many languages of our new practical experiences and reality is expressed in the means and values of the civilization of illiteracy .
an entry consists of a set of attributes , each attribute with one or more values .
the painter 's problem , therefore , is not merely to render the tactile values of the visible objects , but to convey , more rapidly and unfailingly than nature would do , _the consciousness_ of an unusually intense degree of well-being .
as can be seen from the recurrence relation , this method requires three initial values , x0 , x1 and x2 .
the winchester thurston school concentrates on five specific core values including critical thinking , integrity , empathy , community , and diversity in order to encourage and inculcate each student with motivation and fervor .
if the variable is positive with low values and represents the repetition of the occurrence of an event , then count models like the poisson regression or the negative binomial model may be used instead .
this weighted mutual information is a form of weighted kl-divergence , which is known to take negative values for some inputs , and there are examples where the weighted mutual information also takes negative values .
rpm , aerodynamics , and other values are not important to me at this time , just power to weight ratio .
headmaster cutler retired in 1973 but the values he stood for continue to serve as the guiding principles of the school .
the babylonians and egyptians laid the foundation of some of the sciences and arts , but nothing remains at the present day which civilization values .
for a certain negative value of the time the formulæ give impossible values , indicating that there was some initial distribution of heat which could not have resulted , according to known laws of nature , from any previous distribution .
the greens advance a broad multi-issue political platform that reflect its core values of ecological wisdom , social justice , grassroots democracy and non-violence .
hard chrome does perform better than standard high phosphorus en ( hp en ) but with occlusion of various soft particles you can achieve much lower values .
notions of supply and demand , and the relations of the prevailing interest rate to the capital values of securities , they do employ .
to provide quality educational experiences to a diverse community in the context of the buddhist values of excellence , responsibility , compassion , peace and harmony .
johan and cornelis both attended the latin school in dordrecht , which imbued both brothers with the values of the roman republic .
in probability theory and statistics , a continuous-time stochastic process , or a continuous-space-time stochastic process is a stochastic process for which the index variable takes a continuous set of values , as contrasted with a discrete-time process for which the index variable takes only distinct values .
it has been said that war , with all its terrible evils , is the occasion of at least one good which humanity values as above price : it inspires great poetry .
5 series date brightness values right wrong right wrong ( green ) ( red ) ( green ) ( red ) 8a 14 brighter 74 c.m .
when the values in the formulas changed , the diagrams automatically updated to represent the changes .
mullen clearly demonstrated that crime and violence in the city were not so much a consequence of the wild rush for gold but the conflict created by disparate groups with different values occupying the same space .
an age of different values .
saul teaches rebecca and david how to speak english , and tries to instill american values in them ( " easy for you " ) .
by its nature , treason betrays the chivalric values of loyalty and brotherhood .
from this sayce tentatively determined the values of a number of hittite signs .
a smaller percentage of upper grades than the big pines , but with knots so small that the commons offer exceptional values and advantages .
this is needed for very large or very small real numbers , or numbers requiring the use of a decimal point ( such as pi and other irrational values ) .
the central figure is britannia , and the values are printed in different colors .
he values not his relations ; and would deceive them as soon as any others : his aversion to marriage he has always openly declared ; and still occasionally declares it .
scheme that is treated as false by boolean operators , unlike some other languages , in which values like 0 , the empty string , and the empty list may function as false .
this pulsing can be translated into continuous values .
that is , by some kind of self-control about the small things of life for the sake of the big ; an instinctive knowledge of values or sense of proportion ; mutual accommodation , and self-expression in self-sacrifice .
but where our interests and our values are at stake , and where we can make a difference , america must lead .
namely it upholds the traditional values of the middle class as the only true national values .
`` the fact is that allen knows more about the kentwood district and the factory values than any one else , and i feel it my duty to advise alys to leave her affairs in his hands .
its stated mission is to encourage the growth and development of emerging visual artists and writers through residency programs , to propagate aesthetic values and experience , and to restore the year-round vitality of the historic art colony of provincetown .
if the outcome of choosing any particular decision alternative is known for certain and the values placed on these outcomes are clearly specified , the decision prescription becomes straightforward .
belonging , mastery , independence , and generosity are four core values that are intended to integrate western and indigenous cultures .
the values on property went up in meteor flights as reckless speculators sought to buy in on the ground floor .
the `` new order of americanism '' [ 1 ] which arose on this frontier was in part due to the cultural background of its inhabitants , the knowledge and traditional values which they had brought with them .
gauche caviar ( caviar left ) is a pejorative french term to describe someone who claims to be a socialist while living in a way that contradicts socialist values .
likewise the rgb values ( 1,1,1 ) , .
in 1950 the colours of all the low values were changed .
the modern theory of `` ferment , '' that out of all the unrest and change and transvaluation of values a new and better mankind is to be evolved is not borne out by any fact on the horizon .
these suits are typical of all that poverty compels upon the poor , all that they in their ignorance and inexperience of values accept without complaint , fancying they are getting money 's worth and never dreaming they are more extravagant than the most prodigal of the rich .
many conservapedia articles criticize values that its editors associate with " liberal ideology " .
a committee of the association in a report made early in 1920 claimed that the coming of negro owners and tenants into that territory had depreciated property values of $ 400,000,000 fully 50 per cent .
the economic stimuli would be those that have to do with the processes of production , distribution , and consumption of wealth ; that is , the economic stimuli are those which are concerned with economic values .
one belief is that the area 's rainfall helps depress land values and the other is that the risk of volcanic flow from kilauea deters buyers .
ta98 ( terminologia anatomica first edition 1998 ) values for property p1323 .
in some cases , lookup tables are more efficient than non-optimized switch statements since many languages can optimize table lookups , whereas switch statements are not optimized unless the range of values is small with few gaps .
the concept of judeo-christian values does not rest on a claim that the two religions are identical .
any person can have access to these tables of food values by applying to the government , or by purchasing from almost any bookstore any one of the several books on food values , that are on the market .
the calculation of their _arithmetical_ values will alone be demanded .
while her face , unlined , serenely , indeed triumphantly youthful , was quite colourless and sufficiently thin to disclose fine values of bone in the broad forehead and the cutting of jaw and cheek and chin .
necessarily there will be rich people and also those who will be in want of their livelihood , but in the aggregate community there will be equalization and readjustment of values and interests .
a neutral object infers equal values of red , green and blue stimulus .
they are all morally problematic because they are deterministic and assign independent , objective , exogenous values to humans .
johnny was developing some such scent for social values and some such feeling for impending topographical changes as had begun to stir the great houses that were grouped about the princes .
there is no general closed-form expression for the median of the beta distribution for arbitrary values of α and β .
the great advantage of these numbers is , that they proceed on the decimal system -- that is , they denote different values according to their relative places , each character signifying ten times more accordingly as it occupies a place higher .
the principal variation is only one of tone in a few values .
said the king : `` here is a man who is not lightly deceived by the vain shows of this world , and who values truth more than dry shoes .
the heat is non-uniformly distributed , and the highest values appear at the source and drain sides of the channel .
the organisation claims to have had great success during the earlier years of its work , on the basis that crusader classes were allegedly very different from sunday schools at the time , while still teaching the same principles and values supported by the christian faith .
_but withal there is no zenith of values , _ but only a zenith of _power._ absolute _exclusion of mechanical and materialistic interpretations._ they are both only expressions of inferior states , of emotions deprived of all spirit ( of the `` will to power '' ) .
this evil was still further aggravated by the different values of this currency in the several states――being in some five , in some ten , in others twenty per cent .
a random process with a negative correlation between adjacent values could behave this way .
prices and values at time of dissolution compared with modern , 130-136 .
included is the so-called implied distribution , describing the distribution of values for which this coding yields a minimum-size code ; see relationship of universal codes to practical compression for details .
the hsca stated that oswald 's actions and values were consistent with someone who would favor the castro regime , and speculated that oswald may have associated with anti-castro activists in order to implicate that movement in the assassination or for some unrelated reason .
the inventory for 1912 made by the census bureau does show a very considerable increase , the largest item being due to a rise in real estate values .
by cash alone all political questions are decided—one article of a treaty he values at so much , another has its price also .
these were in use for several years , but as the stocks ran out in 1920 , the less-popular values had to be surcharged " 1d .
( 1 ) the expression of the object by a few carefully chosen values in flattish patches .
the ' age of warriors ' , which brings strict order to society and a return to fundamental values , essentially leads to excessive focus on strong man rule and warfare .
for a plug , the values are normally those specified in the relevant standard sheet .
noahide laws offer mankind a set of absolute values and a framework for righteousness and justice , while the detailed laws that are currently on the books of the world 's states and nations are presumptively valid .
perhaps there has been no spur to human activity so keen and no motive so naïvely avowed as the desire for `` undying fame , '' and it would be difficult to estimate the rôle the desire for recognition has played in the creation of social values .
the persona is mostly used by writers as a parody of marvel 's captain america with exaggerated " patriotic values " and a sidekick called ernie ( aka ernie the battling boy ) , who was similar to bucky .
in the case of corporations realty and machinery are taxed generally by the local authorities , and stock values by the commonwealth .
these values were inherited by both the beat generation and the hippies .
for example : the name r. j. wilcox has the following values of its 9 1 593366 letters ( see page 1 . )
foreign currency only is used and no race is more skilful in the art of money changing , as they are able to appreciate or depreciate the exchange values at their pleasure .
who values a coyote in canada ?
it seems that cgdcont thing sets up the pdp context ; this article shows the meanings of the values of its parameters , and this explains ( a bit ) more .
competition -- the way a man threads his way through the men who compete with him -- would constitute the highest , purest test of a man 's sense of spiritual values -- the real monastery of modern life .
in one case the difference between the observed and his computed values was eight minutes , and he knew that so accurate an observer as tycho could not make an error so great .
when testing a large number of hypotheses , this can result in large critical values .
these assumptions quantify all energy and mass fluxes in an organism ( including heat , dioxygen , carbon dioxide , ammonia ) and imply rules for the covariation of parameter values across species ( body size scaling relationships ) .
the path integral monte carlo method is a numerical approach for determining the values of the internal energy , based on quantum dynamical principles .
what values in the education of an individual are realized through growth in power of appreciation ?
for electrons there are two possible values for the spin angular momentum that is measured along an axis .
the proportional values of the indices are given in the following table : table lxxvi .
but the individual is also indispensable to society because by his activity and ingenuity he creates all the material values , the whole fund of civilization .
in the accounts kept by the recording angels , figured out according to the arithmetic of heaven , entries are made in terms of quality rather than of quantity , and values are determined termined on the basis of capability and intent .
the coming of the automobile industries , the opening of boarding-houses , the southward movement of the vice element , all had their adverse effect on property values before negroes moved east of state street .
ignoring these distinctions can lead to dscr values that overstate or understate a company 's debt service capacity .
plots of first and second derivatives as functions of t , or plots of second derivative values as functions of first derivative values , may reveal important aspects of the processes generating the data .
the cost estimate has a single total value and may have identifiable component values .
the map is not a geographical map but rather a chart in which countries are positioned based on their scores for the two values mapped on the x-axis ( survival values versus self-expression values ) and the y-axis ( traditional values versus secular-rational values ) .
summation of a vector of floating-point values is a basic algorithm in scientific computing , and so an awareness of when loss of significance can occur is essential .
but these higher values of human life can not be brought about by a mere process of organization .
its political culture was resolutely centrist , incorporating values of both left ( the reference to 1789 , the defense of freedom , and a reformist agenda ) and right ( law and order , the defense of liberalism , opposition to statism and collectivism ) .
the equilibrium mass values at the end of each humidity step were used to calculate the sorption and desorption isotherms ( figure 1b ) .
shows kohlrausch 's values for the ionic velocities of three chlorides of alkali metals at 18° c , calculated for a potential gradient of 1 volt per cm .
harry had no more shared the reverent attitude of his family toward household æsthetics than toward social values .
i shall accept them at their face values .
) , n. one who values ; an appraiser .
_ped._ why , sir , don scipio , being a gentleman of discernment , perceives my worth , and values it .
the _number of leukocytes_ rapidly increases , roughly with the beginning of the steeper temperature drop at about 35° c. [ 95° f. ] rectal temperature to values of from 25,000 to 27,000 per cu .
it was demonstrated by hermann schwarz that already for the cylinder , different choices of approximating flat surfaces can lead to different limiting values of the area ( known as schwarz 's paradox .
the map function , transforming all the values in an array through a mapping function , will ignore the returned value ( discarding it ) if it 's an out-of-band nil ; in this way , it is possible to perform map-and-filter operations in place .
i think he values policy to such degree , the article becomes in inconvenient nuisance to the policy .
in this case the solutions can be derived directly , for if b is unity , the equation may be written y = ax - c , and solutions are obtained by giving x positive integral values greater than c/a .
messer griffo was to enter his , simone 's , service at what rate of pay he might , weighed in the scale of fairness and with a proper calculation of market values , demand .
shillings , royal shield encircled by the garter , no legend ; fourpence , threepence , twopence , and penny , values , either iiii .
if the materials of money were an exception to the general diminution of cost of production , the values of all other things would fall in relation to money—that is , there would be a fall of general prices throughout the world .
the concept of rape predisposes a whole load of values that we just have no idea whether animals have .
the social values -- it is difficult to classify them as legal , economic and religious , since all three are blended -- gave little weight indeed to the desires of the masses , and tremendous weight to the slightest whims of the despot .
gives the arithmetic means for each year of the absolute daily range , of the monthly range ( or difference between the highest and lowest values in the month ) , and of the yearly range ( or difference between the highest and lowest values of the year ) .
it is not against psychoanalysis or even behavior modification but it insists that the needs for meaning , for higher values , for a spiritual life , are as real as biological or social needs .
he asked their values , touching them rather pitifully ; perhaps he visualised the radiant youth they had once enfolded , and i may have been misjudging him all along .
secondary contacts of this type have only secondary values because they represent means rather than ends .
though not quite as comical , girl meets world sweetly shares the nostalgia of its predecessor , boy meets world , [ sic ] with its young audience while providing positive moral values for today 's youth .
apportionment of income. -- when the housewife thoroughly understands the qualities of foods as well as their comparative food values and is familiar with the factors that govern food prices , she is well equipped to do economical buying for her family .
it accused the largely immigrant roman catholic population of subverting presbyterian values and of causing drunkenness , crime , and financial imprudence .
they are not always present , and the application of any such arbitrary rule as that suggested by mr. alvord would make it possible to place values which were purely fictitious .
the battle of verdun was a battle for moral values , and the possession of the town itself was never of any real military value .
sir sidney lee reckons his income , allowing for the altered values of money , at £1040 in our currency .
i am calculating average values in a database of a few million records .
more complicated scoring systems attribute values not only for the type of alteration , but also for the letters that are involved .
in advising clients on an asking price , the agent must be aware of recent sale prices ( or rental values ) for comparable properties .
thirteen values were issued , ranging from 2a to 20r .
decreased industrial activity and lower property values caused many liberty village buildings to fall into neglect .
maintain case consistency on attribute values .
lurking suspicion , distrust of all the moral values , is worse than recognition of human weakness , however deplorable .
a 2002 study compared production energy values for building components ( e .
romani maintained their social organizations and folkways , shunning non-romani contacts , education and values , often as a reaction to anti-romani attitudes and persecution .
the traditional design values category , consisting of three distinct values .
he it is who lives in the most sympathetic relation to symbols and values because he weighs and interprets by these all that is within him and all that is outside him .
they know nothing of the artistic values of their virile tales .
surrender values .
there will be quantum numbers describing any particle in any kind of potential , but there may not be the same number of them and they may not take on the same values .
mixed oxides may exhibit isoelectric point values that are intermediate to those of the corresponding pure oxides .
such a power of reference to reality , of transcending the world of succession and its values , can be cultivated by us ; and this education of our inborn aptitude is a chief function of the discipline of prayer .
then ordinary commodities of lesser values were tried as means of barter , till their prices too rose to such an extent that trade was paralysed .
the newport and goodman families take advantage of rising prices and falling money values during the tudor period .
[ 65 ] material values , in a society where possessions , beyond the land itself and the rude cabin built upon it , are limited , are best gleaned from the probate records , which listed the prized possessions of this frontier community .
`` he has the value of that chest already , in the rose window and the great window , the monstrance , the chalice and the cups , '' tomaso answered , his sense of money values undimmed .
thus a man values his overcoat on a journey as a protection from cold and rain .
therefore , it is largely influenced by temperament , which makes it akin to the modern handling of values .
as an early example of a flux box , the work was cheap and intended to be as widely disseminated as possible , values that are maintained and greatly expanded by wikipedia .
let 's not prostitute our values for poor quality articles .
similarly , in the issue of ecology he observes that the problems facing our environment are only present within the capitalist imaginary that values the continuous expansion of industries .
it is the old story of egypt -- taking out of one pocket to put into the other , with somewhere behind the transaction an economic providence to enhance values in the exchange .
this introduces the conception of specific ionic velocities , for which some values at 18° c. are given by kohlrausch in table x. : -- table x .
and this is also best for the individual , for only through social service can we attain to a full realization of the social values in our environment .
the use of basic linings further affords a means of extracting the copper and other values from siliceous ores which can be used as flux , but which might otherwise be difficult to treat , and it has made possible the cheaper treatment of low-grade mattes .
social values in every sphere are imperfectly rationalized .
mpa acts as an agonist of the progesterone , androgen , and glucocorticoid receptors ( pr , ar , and gr , respectively ) , activating these receptors with ec50 values of approximately 0 .
a humane religion will preach loyalty to many values , harmonized together by the work of a concrete reason and a living art .
on october 6 , 2005 , the department of political science at national taiwan university opens the " shih ming-te lecture " series ; ethnic harmony , political reconciliation and cross-strait peace are its core values .
and we do so , not merely because we enjoy , as disinterested onlookers , the spectacle of human existence , but because the artist makes us enter into it and realize its values .
all they talked of and all that george tarrant talked of was the dances they had been to , and were going to , and could not go to , and the comparative values of various mutual friends , considered solely as dancers .
naturally , they did not have the keen sense of values that i had , who was never given money to buy anything .
a friendship with richard wagner marked the turning point of his life , and the point of departure for his works on the most fundamental values of human life .
their first contribution to the field was their development of the automatic tristimulus integrator , the first device to enable rapid automatic measurement of xyz values of the color spectrum .
rpm values , data transfer rates , etc .
it may be said : what is not mechanical , is not measurable ; and economic values , on the contrary , _are measured_ .
_nutritive values of foods._ -- the following tables , based on those published by letheby , [ 2 ] show the nutritive values ( per lb . )
this metaphor values inclusive , mutualistic and interdependent relations amongst all things .
dirk gently was a five-star script being filmed on a one-star budget , making it look like a designer label knockoff when set against the production values lavished on sherlock .
though there were signs of a diminishing interest in such stock , values had scarcely begun to fall , and having made his position secure , he did not wish his cousin to incur a loss .
terman in 1932 to simplify the approximate analysis of radio circuits with a range of center frequencies and q values .
while the core values of the fraternity are taught during probationary and collegiate membership , sinfonians are expected to live out those values throughout their lives in support of the fraternity 's object .
to form true ideals requires a trained sense of values ; one must develop a power of spiritual perspective , and be able to see things in their true proportions .
after 1971 catastrophic episode , pakistan 's phase shift to parliamentary republicanism and the gradually increasing in democracy caused an upheaval of traditional social hierarchy and gave birth to the ethic that has formed a core of political values in pakistan .
dragons assigned random values to a player character 's attributes , while allowing each character a fixed number of skills .
the catholic students federation , buddhist students union , hindu society and islamic majilis play a vital role , inculcating spiritual values through the conduct of religious programmes .
this is a dreadful motion picture - a lowbrow example of period piece comedy with terrible production values and an exceptionally poor laughs-to-jokes ratio .
why , lord rosebery declared himself in favour of taxation of land values fifteen years ago .
a plurality of values , each unique and in its own way indispensable to a complete world of values , is not inconsistent with relations of higher and lower among them .
monetization , therefore , can not , for this further reason , add to , or take away from , their respective values , because the exchangeability that monetization is supposed to give them is a natural quality and not the creature of law .
c negative values indicate that both substances are diamagnetic .
some of us are not conscious of these `` spiritual values , '' but that german scholarship has poison-gassed vast tracts of modern thought is evident enough .
by the way , any measure can be decomposed into the sum of a measure regular at infinity plus one with only values 0 or infinity .
the first table below gives a brief , one-sentence description of possible quality scale values .
note : it takes as its fundamental principle that the most probable values are those which make the sum of the squares of the residual errors of the observation a minimum .
this thinking is so contrary to wikipedia values , so persistent , it seems time to take some action .
the higher heating value takes into account the latent heat of vaporization of water in the combustion products , and is useful in calculating heating values for fuels where condensation of the reaction products is practical ( e .
`` transvalue your values ! ''
although values for the largest specimens of _h .
in a word , as we understand by the measure of celestial bodies the relation resulting from the comparison of these bodies with each other , so , by the measure of values , we must understand the relation which results from their comparison .
the distances of the different points of the curve from the datum line are values of y .
a ted-ed educator and featured expert on big think , steve has spoken around the world on the values of educating students through technology and mentorship .
prizes of the undermentioned values will be given half-yearly for suggestions meriting reward : men 's departments. -- one of £10 ; two of £5 ; two of £2 10s .
it encompasses a great deal because o 'odham him-dag intertwines religion , morals , values , philosophy , and general world view which are all interconnected .
[ page heading : giotto and values of touch ] let us now turn back to giotto and see in what way he fulfils the first condition of painting as an art , which condition , as we agreed , is somehow to stimulate our tactile imagination .
these " ' substitution expectations " ' of the genotypes are known also as " ' " breeding values " " ' .
high values may indicate diabetes .
we have now considered both climate and elevation , and the values of the various kinds of forest land , and have next to look at , and if possible value , the effects of aspect .
the values of the dimensionless parameters are held to be the same for both the scale model and application .
finally the question naturally arises , how did the computer obtain these values , _i.e._ , how was the whole structure built up ?
it provides an opportunity to affirm values of self and discipline and to study how these values may be lived in practice .
the result set generated by this query demonstrates how sql uses null as a placeholder for values missing from the right-hand ( phonenumber ) table , as shown below .
the dearest thing we have are those values of life that christ gives us .
if the item is ap , two values are popped off the stack and the application done ( first applied to second ) .
it seems to me the ablest and most effective work in support of the taxation of land values that has appeared since the death of henry george . ''
these facts are obscured by the omission of the solvent from the expression that is normally used to define pka , but pka values obtained in a given mixed solvent can be compared to each other , giving relative acid strengths .
in contrast , the new movement appealed to better educated urban hindus , by conducting religious education classes for children and adults , and interpreting the values , concepts and principals behind the religion for lay people .
rgb values as a 24-bit hexadecimal value .
it would be helpful if you could estimate what these values would be in canadian dollars today .
`` there should be a guide to tell us all the histories of these boxes , '' said taleza-corti , with his keen perception of values .
the economist must emulate the practical business man , in trying to treat in price terms the various social changes which affect economic values .
however , in pattern matching , the type of each extracted value is checked based on the types declared by the relevant constructor , and how many values you can extract is known based on the constructor , so it does not face these problems .
the six series of observed values were made comparable on equal terms by first reducing them to a uniform pe and then by assigning to m , the point of departure , the value of 0 .
critics or opponents often see transhumanists ' goals as posing threats to human values .
the figures for the dollar values prove rather interesting so we give them here : -- 1905 ret 'd and 1897 .
by age eight , he had concluded that commercial values were threatening life on the planet .
it is an abstraction from individual values , a distillation of their common essence .
the maine curators ' forum , a consortium of curators and directors from museums , colleges and universities , art centers and galleries throughout the state , also issued a statement that called lepage 's action a " direct affront to our values as arts professionals .
a plurality of legal values , in marginal equilibrium !
their theory concerning hot colours and high tones is sounder than their linear theory ; but in copying a joyous landscape is one not _forced_ to put on high tonalities and hot colours , since it is in _seeing_ these high values that we experience the sensation of joy ?
like kierkegaard , nietzsche saw the moral values of 19th-century europe disintegrating into nihilism ( kierkegaard called it the levelling process ) .
in my example , we must exclude x values that are negative , as well as the isolated value 2 ; that could be taken to give us a domain .
the old imperial value of the yard was used in converting measurements to metric values in india in a 1976 act of the indian parliament .
assuming for a moment , that yarns were equally improved and prolific in the multiplication of values , the seven millions and a half of foreign exports should represent a value proportionally of forty-five millions sterling .
one of its values is that its projectiles throw up sufficient dust to enable the gunner to tell exactly where they strike , and within a few seconds he is able to alter the range accordingly .
thus , and thus only , can moral values , as it seems to me , be successfully maintained .
the lower values , about 1·720 , correspond to the most transparent red and blue stones ; the deep violet stones have values above 1·730 .
traditions of italy are some set of traditions , beliefs , values , and customs that belongs within the culture of italian people .
the single tax proposal is to abolish all taxes except the tax on land values .
not morals , but movie values .
but no two men have exactly the same faculties , nor can things have for any two exactly the same values .
the values not merely of land but of money are in his thought .
note also that in garbage-collected languages , objects are generally dynamically allocated ( on the heap ) even if they are initially bound to an automatic variable , unlike automatic variables with primitive values , which are typically automatically allocated ( on the stack or in a register ) .
the factor of evaporation has a certain value corresponding to every feed-water temperature and boiler pressure , and the values of this factor are given in the accompanying table .
she is an excellent illustration of the possibility of living to the uttermost in the crowded avenues of the world without any loss of religious or moral values .
in the theory of computation , a mealy machine is a finite-state machine whose output values are determined both by its current state and the current inputs .
[ 182 ] intrinsically , there is no more reason why the economist should concern himself with measuring quantitatively the effect of tariff laws than with a similar treatment of other legal values .
he values it less than his dog .
a new design that included a reclining lion appeared in 1862 , but it was used only for 3 öre , 17 öre , and 20 öre values before being superseded in 1872 by a design featuring a large numeral in a round frame .
the regional forest agreements are 20 year plans for the conservation and sustainable management of australia 's native forests , and are intended to provide certainty to commercial forestry operations while protecting environmental values .
in the 19th century , palaeographical work relating to chant was done in various places in europe against the background of a performance style based on proportional durational values that were assigned to various deteriorated forms of chant used in various locales .
vast areas of land went out of cultivation , the reported acreage of farm land in all the southern states was less in 1870 than in 1860 , and the total and average values of land everywhere decreased .
then could be heard pizarro 's stern voice ringing above the melée , `` let no man who values his life strike at the inca ! ''
it may be , perhaps , because we have such splendid specimens of both at the period of the year when one values such things highest , namely , in the fall and winter and early spring .
* yet carlyle had never rendered him that service , easy as it appears , which one man of letters most justly values from another : that of proclaiming the admiration which he privately expresses for his works .
in 1850 the value of this crop in all the states amounted to nearly $ 300,000,000 , being about equal to the united values of the wheat , hay , and cotton crops , and it has perhaps doubled since that date .
more generally , for any subring r of a characteristic 0 field k , a polynomial in k [ t ] takes values in r at all integers if and only if it is an r-linear combination of binomial coefficient polynomials .
trinity is a member institution of the annapolis group , a consortium of leading national independent colleges which share a commitment to liberal arts values and education ; and is a member of the associated colleges of the south .
dates vary by territory , but by 1900 values start appearing surcharged in red or black ink to use the remaining stocks while colonies then used illustrated stamps .
along with action sequences , stories focused on intelligent plotting and character development , winning the series praise for its subtle teaching of such values as individuality , freedom and the volatility of humanity .
with old-fashioned values , joe acts as the patriarch of the roscoe family .
next to his business the milkman values his daughter , who , when i first saw her , was a plump , rosy-cheeked child and tended her father's cows .
the 16 hardware and the 16 software interrupt vectors each consist of a pair of pc and wp values , so the register context switch is automatically performed by an interrupt as well .
while positivists believe that the researcher and the researched person are independent of each other , postpositivists accept that theories , background , knowledge and values of the researcher can influence what is observed .
a case in which none of the extraneous elements of experience operate is called an _ideal case_ , and the inference from a series of values leading to the limit-value is an _extrapolation_ .
_health values , 8_ ( 3 ) , 12-15 .
later , in christopher marlowe and shakespeare , the main characters have more than a choice between heaven and hell and may evaluate them in the light of their own values .
the tone values in two-tone dialects can be predicted in some cases from the three-tone values , but not the reverse .
and now , out of life the crucible , immutable values seemed to evolve themselves .
the set of values of a function when applied to elements of a finite set is finite .
rao lower bound can substantially underestimate the variance when parameter values are small relative to the noise variance .
they then describe the problem as an issue of public policy and social values which is not for the courts to decide .
the times said that it would focus on its " core strengths , " which it identified as " exclusive reporting and in-depth national political coverage , enterprise and investigative reporting , geo-strategic and national security news and cultural coverage based on traditional values .
it is the sign of this sort of promptitude that he values solely in work of another .
the label is a result of many of the party 's leading members promoting communist values , either currently or previously ; notable examples are erling folkvord and former party leader , torstein dahle .
with it there came a kind of exasperation , never quite to leave me , of the certainty of not choosing my own values , but of being driven with them aside and apart .
8·16·24·32·40 \z/ _| a table of the values of 2z^-1j1 ( z ) has been given by e. c. j. lommel ( _schlömilch_ , 1870 , 15 , p. 166 ) , to whom is due the first systematic application of bessel 's functions to the diffraction integrals .
he had a just estimate of values , and the temperament that can laugh at all trivial misfits .
in the wake of the revolution , american episcopalians faced the task of preserving a hierarchical church structure in a society infused with republican values .
spirituality , which might have resided in the elementary values , sensuous or passionate , before the relational process supervened , can now exist only in the ultimate activity to which these processes are instrumental .
17. -- having no mother who values herself on her youth , is presented by an aunt -- first terrified , then charmed .
the two problems together indicate a range of values for pi between 3 .
chem_. , 1896 , ii , p. 73 ) , by reducing cobalto-cobaltic oxide , and by the analysis of the chloride , have obtained the values 58.56 and 58.48 .
scholars suggest integrity and equality as masculine values in male-male relationships , and virility in male-female relationships .
stratospheric temperature measurements beginning in the 1970s also showed maximum values near the 1986 solstice .
connected learning does not strive to improve this individual competitiveness , but addresses the overall health of communities and learning writ large , centering on the values of equity , full participation and collective contribution .
many companies understand that solid profitability lies in sustainable development , and in order to keep their own csr values intact , they must consider the implications of working with other companies that do not possess the same values .
we may distinguish the values on the neutral axis from color values by writing them n1 , n2 , n3 , n4 , n5 , n6 , n7 , n8 , n9 , n10 .
generational consciousness is when a group of people become mindful of their place in a distinct group identifiable by their shared interests and values .
there ’ s going to be a big raise in land values in a certain locality in a little while , and our firm ’ s going to make a lot of money. ” “ where is the land ? ” asked larry , carelessly .
perhaps the simplest is the leapfrog method which is second order and ( roughly speaking ) relies on two time values .
so it is necessary for power and resistance variables to be able to take on both positive and negative values .
[ sidenote : spontaneous values rehabilitated . ]
it is not literature , but it is journalism at its very best , and has fine story values .
conglomerate discount is an economic concept describing a situation when the stockmarket values a diversified group of businesses and assets at less than the sum of its parts .
the album is presumably out-of-print , due to its relative rarity , but is sought after by fans for its high production values and faithfulness to the book 's tone .
it has never subjected questions of faith and morals to popular vote nor has it determined discipline by parliamentary practice under a well developed party system , therefore it has preserved its unity , its integrity and its just standard of comparative values .
new colors and values appeared in 1879 .
the core values of justice , respect , generosity , excellence and education , honesty and integrity , privacy , and stewardship are emphasized in a code of ethics ( ucn [ 3 ] , 2008 ) .
galileo and bacon gave a still newer curve to it , which altered its values ; but all these changes had never altered the continuity .
for he that values liberty , confines his zeal for her predominance within no narrow bounds ; her cause engages him wherever pleaded .
multiples of these values were expressed by repeating the symbol as many times as needed .
besides , marriage was a great readjuster of values .
`` the mere juxtaposition of two comparable values naturally gives no complete idea of the facts .
johan hjort , his family and values .
`` his generous , sunny nature makes every one love him , and i believe he values the love of his friends more than most things . ''
no other printings of either of the two values were ever again made in these colours on the unwatermarked paper .
john van buren flack traveled here in 1880 after hearing about the medicinal values of the spring water .
can you see if he has left anything about which he values ?
a 2011 profile of yoest in the christian science monitor said yoest " is not shrill , rigid , or somehow provincial in values or experience .
in the case of a rectangle of two lines we have come to speak of the `` product of the lines , '' meaning the product of their numerical values .
data elements that store " codes " or enumerated values must also specify the semantics of each of the code values with precise definitions .
when one is selected ( or typed in manually ) , the menu will update to show the possible values to filter by for that property , and this list is based on the current location and other parts of the query already typed .
who values them ?
the si unit of mass would have been fully defined by having precisely fixed the values of the avogadro constant and elementary charge , and by exploiting the fact that the atomic masses of bismuth and gold atoms are invariant , universal constants of nature .
it has also been proposed that weak acids such as acetic acid , which are not fully dissociated at physiological ph values , can penetrate taste cells and thereby elicit an electrical response .
the values in parentheses give a range of what can be used for all cancer types , but not all cancers use this full range .
before there can be a rational _curriculum_ , we must settle which things it most concerns us to know ; or , to use a word of bacon 's , now unfortunately obsolete -- we must determine the relative values of knowledges .
rotor spun yarns show the least value in both the values .
the united states always had a civic culture with civic values and an aspiration to , ultimately , create a harmonious and benevolent civic society .
[ 716 ] the table of comparative values by sir george shuckburgh ( philosoph .
the unskilled , pleasure-loving , short-sighted but ambitious girl , is apt to lose her sense of values , and to be an easy and sometimes very willing victim .
virginia chose “ the scientific adjustment of food values ” ; and , before she had got through the first chapter , started to blame me for giving them cheese _and_ butter , when i might know that both contained a sweeping majority of proteids .
journ._ , 1892 , 14 , p. 261 ) by conversion of cadmium into the oxalate and then into oxide , obtained values ranging from 111.981 to 112.05 , whilst w.s .
1960 in substituting the numerical values in the above calculation it was assumed that the temperature of the burning mixture would be 1500° f above zero , and that the exhaust temperature would be as low as 60 .
and part of the picture of the times centers in man ’ s quest for new values for life itself .
the distribution depends on the values of ( nu , m ) .
on behalf of his family and himself , mohamadou bayero fadil , stated that the naming not only represented recognition of a city but that of the entire nation , to a man who respects human values and republican principles .
a speculative bubble reflects a situation in which asset prices are consistently trading at considerably higher values than intrinsic values .
family interests , class interests , party interests , and the material good of the individual take their place , in the scale of values , below the ideal of patriotism , for that ideal is right , which is absolute .
extending his argument , bakhtin proposes that all languages represent a distinct point of view on the world , characterized by its own meaning and values .
for example , in the context of river flooding where analyses are often based on annual values of the largest flow within the year , there may be interest in making inferences about the largest flood likely to be experienced within the next 50 years .
we find notice of the issue of the new values in the _dominion philatelist_ [ 117 ] as follows : -- as foreshadowed in the postmaster general 's report , there have appeared canada postage stamps of the value of 20c .
thought no longer found satisfaction in appraising them in a scale of values according to their nearness to , or remoteness from , fixed truths .
that is , the angular momentum can have values h , 2h , 3h , 4h .
the tables below will give the " official " values of r ( x ) and w ( x ) .
modern bcd sees promotion of christian values and belarusian patriotism in the country as its primary goal .
some digital loop controllers offer a self-tuning feature in which very small setpoint changes are sent to the process , allowing the controller itself to calculate optimal tuning values .
while time is forever flowing onward , permanent truths and values of life must be found , which can sustain from within all aspiration and endeavour .
the difference between the two values is very large , but rankine , of course , depends entirely on the value of the constant 1.8 , which is quite empirical , and is for a flat band instead of a hollow parachute .
the production values were stated to be inconsistent .
a cult of justice and modesty is contrasted with the cult of power ; in the former , sentiment and feeling have a place as criteria of values ; in the latter the appeal is to science and to reason .
since the ◡_̷ and ◡◡_̷ are both rising rhythm they may be readily substituted one for the other -- the appearance of equal time values being preserved -- without disturbing the musical flow of sounds .
most of the politicians dwell in pookkollai and it makes it a posh area having higher real estate values .
color expression in terms of the hues , values , and chromas .
the local merges retain the same o ( n ) complexity of a standard merge , albeit with more assignments since the values must be swapped rather than copied .
variety gave the film a mixed review , stating that tsugita 's film direction " feels rushed " and that the " production values are cheap " while saying that " schlock-crazed fanboys everywhere will be engorged with excitement for the pic 's ancillary release .
the original is , however , in very low relief , so low that it hardly affects the colour values .
while the exact values of the parameters r and s were unknown , critical exponents could still be calculated with ease , and only depend on the original assumptions of symmetry and analyticity .
‘ then demand of your relation , as she values her salvation , to throw this book into the fire. ’ and that i do now martha .
receiving devices can also connect to the ibeacons to retrieve values from ibeacon 's gatt ( generic attribute profile ) service .
we are aware too of purpose and of values ; we are aware of making and shaping and creating ; we know what it is to choose and direct , to arrange and rearrange , to produce novelty .
the left side here can be transformed into the right side , simply by applying the laws of algebra so as to carry out the operations indicated , without taking account in any way of the numerical values of x and y .
according to plenge , the " ideas of 1789 " that included rights of man , democracy , individualism and liberalism were being rejected in favour of " the ideas of 1914 " that included " german values " of duty , discipline , law , and order .
in this case all the single entity instance values are given independently from each other in alphabetical order as defined above with all entity values grouped together in parentheses .
the consequence of all this is , that the people of the united states pay their duties and taxes in currencies of different values , in different places .
subscripting can be used to retrieve values from indexes ( array ) or keys ( dictionary ) , and with mutable objects , can also be used to set objects to indexes or keys .
balancing rations , trying to equalise flesh , fat ( warmth ) and mineral , is not a very hard proposition when the values of even a few grains and plants are realised .
in a given architecture , successive address values designate successive units of memory ; this unit is the unit of address resolution .
it was an interesting indication of how their sense of values had already shifted that the loss to the world of one of its biggest diamonds seemed the least of their minor disasters .
but degradation of moral values , lack of commitment and the overall apathy of the public to the commissions and omissions of the system can lead to dangerous situations .
whether , under favourable circumstances and the rare public spirit of private owners , much can be done , or to any wide extent , so long as absolute individual ownership in land and ground values is allowed , seems to me very doubtful .
one 's values are profoundly changed when he is finally convinced that creation is only a vast motion picture , and that not in it , but beyond it , lies his own reality .
in this approach , address values which differ by one designate adjacent memory words .
residents expressing opposition say their east-facing views of victoria , nearby esquimalt harbour , and of the gulf islands and olympic mountains , the primary reason for their buying property at bear mountain , will be blocked , and that their property values will collectively decrease .
convenience , desirability , and other factors involving individuals who make up the public enter into the determination of realty values .
manitoba 's culture has been influenced by both traditional ( aboriginal and métis ) and modern canadian artistic values , as well as some aspects of the cultures of immigrant populations and its american neighbours .
fraser , the supreme court recognized the special responsibility of the public schools to inculcate moral values and to teach students the boundaries of socially acceptable behavior .
the dots are described as representing the group 's core values of " integrity , vigilance and helpfulness .
mental health psychologist paul martin said such comments would be psychologically damaging to young gay people , stating " the last thing they need to hear are these kinds of offensive comments from people who purport to represent ' family values ' .
apart from evangelism and other church activities , as part of its endeavor towards spiritual development , the abcc gives equal importance to human resources development with christian values .
oh , believe me , in new york we do these things with a proper regard for the dramatic values -- culture governs all !
he wrote plays that engaged in the complexities and conflicts of the values and identity of the filipino .
the teenage daughter , molly , commits herself to the graffiti elements of hip-hop culture , which causes a conflict in values between her and her brother .
we may see it at work in the fostering of friendly affection , in the deepening of love for favorite spots of earth , in the encouragement of righteous purpose , in the true judging of life 's values .
as a transformation of rgb values , hsv values share the same limitation .
the us national park service publishes different values ( 1881m for surface elevation , and 592m for the maximum depth ) .
and who knows if their values are not as good as ours ?
barbara oakes has two samplers which she values very much because her great-grandmother and grandmother made them .
these values are reflected back , by the imputation processes , to the various `` factors of production '' which have made the existence of the goods and services possible , in accordance with well-known laws which need not be here elaborated .
for the good -- they can not create ; they are always the beginning of the end : -- -- they crucify him who writeth new values on new tables , they sacrifice unto themselves the future -- they crucify the whole human future !
the jam comrade outwood supplies to us at tea is all right as a practical joke or as a food for those anxious to commit suicide , but useless to anybody who values life . ''
it has dealt with the presence of an inner world of thought -- a world of values and judgments of values , of norms , imperatives , and ideals -- realities which are not presented in any scheme of natural science .
a right estimate of absent values must be conventional and mediated by signs .
it was a very great betrayal , for as he himself noted , many of these names become very indistinct when transcribed in english phonetic values .
in 2008 , sima waged an internet war against chinese commentators and intellectuals he says have hijacked this year 's national dramas to undermine communist party rule and patriotic values .
he values his character -- not so much of it only as can be seen by others , but as he sees himself ; having regard for the approval of his inward monitor .
if now we substitute these values for their symbols in the formula : `` time , times and half-time '' we shall obtain , 70 plus 490 , plus 35 , equals to 595 years .
registered nurses are expected to access , appraise , and incorporate research evidence into their professional judgment and decision-making as well as to consider preferences and values of their patient population .
wal-mart advocates particularly emphasize the democratic values inherent in providing a store where all americans can afford to shop .
drawing attention to his political ideology , in 2005 hawke made it known that he believed the liberal party to be the home of conservative values , and claimed that " nobody joins the liberal party to be left-wing .
engaged buddhism is an attempt to apply buddhist values to larger social problems , including war and environmental concerns .
thus , the name embodies the organization 's core values .
it is possible to set different values for the cpus in each container .
it contained a series of graphs showing the resulting lift and drag of several naca 6-series airfoil sections from tests performed in a variable-density wind tunnel , in which the reynolds number ( rn ) was set at three different values .
to promote identical grayscale image display on different monitors and consistent hard-copy images from various printers , the dicom committee developed a lookup table to display digitally assigned pixel values .
in particular , it may be remarked that the emotions , of which the contemplation is essential to the greatest values , and which are also themselves appropriately excited by such contemplation , appear to be those which are commonly most highly prized under the name of affection .
for dr. holmes incidentally lets us know that he cherishes and values the instinct of intolerance and destructiveness in presence of the cruel , the self-loving , and the false .
during our three or four winters at the old squire 's we boys had naturally picked up considerable knowledge about lumber and lumber values .
clustering objects based on sets of attributes taking similar values dates back to the work of hartigan and was called biclustering by mirkin .
but while avoiding any change in the language of the poem or even any attempt at a uniform spelling , i have taken a few harmless liberties with its alphabet and restricted certain of the letters to their modern values , substituting for others a modern equivalent .
the only difference would be that the values begin increasing after crossing the zero at the designated sea level datum .
living mostly in rural areas and keeping intact many of their socio-cultural values more or less in pristine forms the rural people of purulia have their folks to speak about many of their tenets .
what is it to render the tactile values of an object but to communicate its material significance ?
after the point values are revealed and totaled , the board is cleared and the second member is given 25 seconds ( originally 20 ) to answer the same five questions .
scholar david whisnant has argued that settlement schools created a version of " traditional " appalachian culture that appealed to outsiders but had little basis in the values of appalachian people themselves .
it also brought a further slowing down of the duration of the larger note values while introducing even more new small ones ( fusa , semifusa etc .
our guiding values are quality , accessibility and education .
the ( values ) expression returns no values at all , but since the function call to list needs to reduce its argument expression to a value , the null object is automatically substituted .
the encoding between numerical values and bit patterns is chosen for convenience of the operation of the computer ; the bit format used by the computer 's instruction set generally requires conversion for external use such as printing and display .
remember that you are assisting caesar to forge those very chains that one day he will make you yourselves wear. ” this is what every man ( who values freedom ) ought to consider .
she had gone from shop to shop , comparing values and prices .
if the knowledge of food values were with you , you would get the less expensive and more nourishing cuts .
many summation methods are used to assign numerical values to divergent series , some more powerful than others .
the dose values are divided by the maximum dose , referred to as dmax , yielding a plot in terms of percentage of the maximum dose .
she values haru as more than a subordinate and is often the voice of reason to him when he is willing to go to extremes to protect her .
lul color and tube map for the line colours and styles ( which have different hex values to tfl 's colour guidelines ) .
) , a double standard of monetary values ; i. e. , a gold standard and a silver standard , both of which are made legal tender .
it is the sattavic dhrti which is strength , force and ability that makes us hold on to noble values of life .
napoleon bonaparte is master of france , and in the way to be master of europe , because he has a nice sense of the values of men , and the best head for detail that was ever formed in human shape .
on the other hand , a sense of the dramatic values , coupled with the intelligence to play upon them skillfully , is an invaluable quality in any military leader .
for the columns which have two values and are separated by a horizontal bar , the heading should reflect that , e .
orthomolecularists claim that the causes of psychotic disorders include food allergy , hypoglycemia , hypothyroidism in the presence of normal thyroid values , heavy metal intoxications including those allegedly due to dental fillings , as well as several hypothesised conditions they call pyroluria , histadelia and histapenia .
on 10 may 1999 , li gave an interview with time , during which he stated that " human moral values are no longer good " and reiterated falun gong 's differentiation from other qigong groups .
in a republic , no man can in theory overbear his neighbour ; nor , as he values his own rights , can he do it much or long in practice .
on values 1c .
so this cheerful looking person was horace who , cooperating with fluffy , had set an example that had cheapened all love ’ s values ?
decision theorists have grappled with decisions pertaining to diagnosis and the resulting prescriptions for improving communication , incentives , reactions of the individuals to group and analysis of human values write stated objectives .
`` if you could but believe that there is none on earth values these less than my brother .
there is too large a percentage of values which , being intangible , are matters of judgment .
properly stated , administrators generally do a very poor job of implementing the values the project claims to advance .
he declared ; and it touched her oddly to see that his new passion had not altered his old standard of values .
the thomson allows for negative values for negatively charged ions .
the values of all things can never , therefore , rise or fall simultaneously .
realistic options were defined as having real consequences consisting of personnel actions or non-actions modified by environmental facts and values .
the winner is determined by tallying the numerical values of the three cards .
there in the great darkness i stood alone , unaided , sensing the approach of an entity from some horribly remote place where all values were altered .
unlike his sister , who put her trust in face values , he wished to go to the bottom of the matter .
the core values of the gfs aimed at high moral standards for its members ; they attempted to supply for every working girl of unblemished character a friend in a class above her own .
jean-claude 's reputation , the american weretiger population , jason 's family values , keith 's impending marriage , and the governor 's bid for president are the least of their problems and just the tip of the metaphysical iceberg .
it has been praised for this style , as it values successful gameplay more than impressive graphics .
the humla district an important part of ancient buddhist religions and it holds a lot of histories , cultures and values of a typical buddhist life .
`` there is no southern state that apprehends any injury from its slaves -- that seeks protection from any power on earth -- not one of them values the union one particle as the means of guarding them on that score .
nor does this represent a tithe of the values , as yet barely realized , which these researches placed at our disposal .
the proportional values of the variations in alternate measures for accented and unaccented elements are given in the following table , in which the figures for the trochaic and iambic forms are combined : table xxxviii .
shrink values around you can also create a projection as it would occur on the left wall , floor , or ceiling .
this formula is compared with the experiments , and the column of differences shows that the calculated and the observed values agree very closely .
although exceptions in eiffel have a fairly clear philosophy , kiniry ( 2006 ) criticizes their implementation because " exceptions that are part of the language definition are represented by integer values , developer-defined exceptions by string values .
she shall lead them to love cimabue , to distinguish with scholarship ripe ’ twixt the texture of clausen and clouet , and the values of collier and cuyp .
as shown , these values may be negative .
18:3 ) ; of the revision of all ideas , of all standards , of all values .
17-20. review , combining two values and a single hue for design .
further , after decoding , all values greater than 0 are interpreted as 1 while all values less than zero are interpreted as 0 .
the church , pillaged and persecuted , lost all the material advantages it had hitherto enjoyed : in return , the loss of all these relative values was made good by the absolute value of spiritual independence .
the main component of the novel that strays from genre is the complete lack of imperial values .
it broke up and reconstructed the whole of the machinery by which the old toryism had managed the people , and it involved the first great revision of social values which had taken place in england .
and with the appropriate change of attitudes and values the recognition of economic success may be subordinated to the recognition of human values .
on the other hand , it is doubtless a condition of the deal that the road shall be turned over whole as to its property values -- there is to be no wrecking in the general acceptance of the word .
a supervaluation v is a function from sentences to truth values such that x is supertrue ( i .
in addition , real estate values have risen due to a boom from 2003 to 2006 , caused by bay area residents ' discovery that lake county residential real estate was lower in cost than that in adjacent napa , sonoma and mendocino counties .
it has no bias toward a lower order of mundane values .
`` to bestow all the qualities one would like to possess , but never can quite possess , on another individual , to make it the representative of all values , that is to love . ''
he was a doer whose values and beliefs were reflected in his behavior .
adults , who are paying the taxes to support the space exploration program and reaping its practical values , are also thinking of themselves , their country , and their world in broader , more knowledgeable terms .
while constantly demanding the need of effort in order to experience the deeper potencies of spiritual life , eucken insists that such effort can enter into a current only in so far as norms and values are clearly perceived as the meaning and goal of spiritual life .
the relative values of different potatoes may be ascertained very correctly by weighing them in the hand , for the heavier the tuber the more starch it contains .
the foundation is working in special consultative status with the united nations economic and social council ( ecosoc ) is a partner ngo that shankar founded , that focuses on the upliftment of human values at the grassroots level .
adding the values for the three sectors of the river we get 9,130 or , estimating to the nearest hundred , 9,100 .
a tuple is basically the same thing as a row , except in an sql dbms , where the column values in a row are ordered .
these values give us n. dec. 38° 46′ , referring to arcturus warning the august sunrise in 1640 b.c .
of english descent , both of her parents were educators , her mother a former english teacher and her father a biochemist , who raised their children according to strict conventional values .
on the other hand , however , he felt that michael 's " juvenile " response to holly was uncharacteristic , and the " oddly high production values and camera work " were unrealistic for the show .
a young lady , who , with a just pride , values herself very highly , feared that your offer might have been influenced by her wealth ; she wished to be certain ; she has no longer any doubts .
in order to calculate logd values of the test compound , both the logarithms of the partition coefficient ( logp ) and of the dissociation constant ( s ) ( pka ) are needed .
absolute values of the sample work function can be obtained if the tip is first calibrated against a reference sample of known work function .
n ) ) generalization to spherical harmonics on the sphere s2 with n2 nodes was described by mohlenkamp , the fast folding algorithm is analogous to the fft , except that it operates on a series of binned waveforms rather than a series of real or complex scalar values .
the logic values observed at the device 's primary outputs , while applying a test pattern to some device under test ( dut ) , are called the output of that test pattern .
she is not one of those fools who only like the excitement of a thing 's being out of reach ; she has the supreme wisdom of a sense of intrinsic values .
they never would have made in the south anything like a cattle association ; it was left for the yankees to do that at a time when cows had come to have far greater values .
a merchant sends his return , and values it at £10,000 .
by this time the word maravedí was being used for a specific coin officially , for any coin colloquially , and as a synonym for money itself , resulting in a certain confusion in interpreting 13th-century references to money , values , and coinage .
footnote 175 : i have taken the acreage as given in the census of 1841 , but there is another calculation which makes it amount to 32,342,400 ; in which case the several values must be corrected as follows .
the method also allows the inclusion of factors that are difficult to formalize , such as novel insights about the future , deep shifts in values , unprecedented regulations or inventions .
but it is not satisfactory when we are weighing the æsthetic values of universal history .
st john of god health care , in accordance with its catholic values , will not provide some procedures and services , including abortion , sterilisation , contraception , and assisted reproductive technology .
limits can also have infinite values .
all these are values proceeding from exhausted people .
this version of the generalized normal distribution has been used in modeling when the concentration of values around the mean and the tail behavior are of particular interest .
but what is especially to the point , if we compare the values found at successive oppositions , we find that for different canals the values agree in their difference .
the uses and relative values of the metals had obviously been finally adjusted .
with these modern bias functions , full conversion among m-sample variance measures of variating m , t and τ values could used , by conversion through the 2-sample variance .
he was at work at his table in `` the office '' in the yard , the mortons having gone home , but he put down his pen and talked to me for quite a while upon nutrition and food values .
the values of v for the maxima and minima of intensity , and the magnitudes of the latter , were calculated by fresnel .
the predictive values cited are based on the prevalences of upper gi bleeding in the corresponding studies .
peace education is the process of acquiring the values , the knowledge and developing the attitudes , skills , and behaviors to live in harmony with oneself , with others , and with the natural environment .
if the starting concentrations of a and b reactive sites are the same , then papb can be condensed to pgel2 and values for the fraction of all bonds at which an infinite network will form can be found .
the nps described the milpitas hacienda as representing the themes " expressing cultural values " and " developing the american economy " for its connection to hearst and his media empire .
i remember way back in school , someone wrote a program to print a dot on a dot matix printer to according to successive values of a prng .
the phonetic values of /au/ , /uu/ , and /ou/ are [ [ ipa : open-mid back rounded vowel ] : ] , [ u : ] , and [ o : ] .
thus the reference to two cents is in accord with another idiom that values opinions at one cent ( penny for your thoughts ) .
the award recognizes recipients for " the contributions they made to their companies and communities , while upholding the highest standards and values in everything they do .
when our life becomes a dream , our sphere is broken into and usurped by the changing of values , shapes , and appearance of things within it .
the author values your sense of humor .
if fewer variables appear in the list than are on the record , only those values are read and the tape moves on to the end of the record .
the numerical value of the parameter in these transformations can then be determined by experiment , just as the numerical values of the parameter pair c and the vacuum permittivity are left to be determined by experiment even when using einstein 's original postulates .
witt invariant ) of a quadratic form q over a field k takes values in the brauer group br ( k ) .
the new nine was designed by des smyth ( 2006 ryder cup vice-captain ) and declan brannigan , and is an example of modern design with old style golfing values .
there are cases of profitable mines where the values were all in spots , and an assay plan would show 80 % of the assays _nil_ , yet these pockets were so rich as to give value to the whole .
but catherine herself remains clearly conscious of different levels and values in these states : of normal , grace-impelled , freely-willed , strength-bringing contemplations and quietudes ; and of sickly , weakening , more or less hysterical , lassitudes and failures .
class person ) where the matching rules for givenname and mail determine whether the values for those attributes match the filter assertion .
hungarian historian istván janek sees the reason of his death in his " fight for european values , human and minority right and mutual tolerance among nations " .
it may be assumed without debate that the end of business endeavor is a gain in final terms of tangible values .
the information exchanged will be the mps matrices and singular values lying at the border between neighbouring compute nodes .
proposition 8 allowed for a reassessment of real property values in a declining market .
the queen victoria stamps then current , values from 3 pies to 1 rupee were overprinted with the initials c.e.f .
=the public appearance number= =definition 14.= we find the public appearance number by adding the values of all the initials together , in a name as naturally written .
this is why some dealers and body shops specialize in salvage title vehicles and can provide them at low market values .
i agree with münsterberg that the conditional and subjective values of the pragmatist have no meaning unless we have acknowledged beforehand the independent value of truth .
again , a young officer may not be popular among his men in time of peace , but may win all their respect and confidence on the field , where values alter and are frequently reversed from peace equivalents .
only the latter sign has the values bright , burn .
the existence of conference matrices of orders n allowed by the above restrictions is known only for some values of n .
the values of j may be complex numbers , or in fact complex square matrices , corresponding to the possibility of vector-valued automorphic forms .
good modelling and exceedingly vigorous drawing may perhaps ensure great correctness in the counterfeit of the originals , but the life of the picture vanishes beneath the greasy technique , the soapy painting through which materials of drapery and flesh-tints assume quite the same values .
the optimal values of the decision variables can be recovered , one by one , by tracking back the calculations already performed .
children can then become cynical and apathetic towards the process , detecting a divide between values and action and may come to see it as little more than another control mechanism .
now all the ethical values of civilization have been associated with these fixed beliefs ; and so it has come to pass that with their undermining by naturalism the ethical values themselves are in danger of being swept away in the everlasting flux .
if the redirects are kept , i suggest they more naturally point to family values .
frequently , integration takes place in the process of exchanging goods or , at a more general level , values .
this article includes a list of china 's historical gross domestic product ( gdp ) values , the market value of all final goods and services produced by a nation in a given year .
these passages from the positive to the negative and from the real to the imaginary , of which i first have made use , have led me further to the values of many singular definite integrals , which i have accordingly demonstrated directly .
cărtărescu 's " imaginative constructs " had maintained " a good quotation on the market of values .
although the absolute numerical values of astronomical and historical years only differ by one before year 1 , this difference is critical when calculating astronomical events like eclipses or planetary conjunctions to determine when historical events which mention them occurred .
a table of specific values used for the various improvements in health can be found in the report 's executive summary .
the preëxisting static values are themselves to be explained , not as growing out of individual feeling-scales , but as growing out of a complex social psychology , in which some men and groups of men have vastly greater social `` power '' than others .
in fact this title and also `` the will to power '' were considered alternately for his _magnum opus_ which he intended writing after the completion of `` the transvaluation of all values . ''
the temple is operated primarily by volunteers ' time and money , and hosts several youth camps throughout the year in order to engage the hindu youth with cultural values .
high card values in one hand and a singleton or void in the other ; e .
in the first case the algorithm may be storing results from the computation of all the previous values .
yet he seemed to do this ingenuously and without any conception of the moral standards of people used to the values of money .
in the sphere of moral values , the testimony of jesus of nazareth is worth having ; when he denounces the formalism and hypocrisy of the scribes , it is very difficult for any student of the history of morals not to be impressed .
even if the generating function allows convenient calculation of the numerical values , the numerical values are not what makes the bernoulli or fibonacci numbers important .
these patterns will change again for different values of t .
and , instead of being grouped according to relations and relative values , should they be studied , one at a time , in the order in which they are presented , with the idea that a topic is mastered when each single statement upon it is understood ?
[ 65,600 ft. ] values are the average of a series of experiments .
the corrections to the coulomb interaction between the electron and the proton in a hydrogen atom due to relativistic motion and spin-orbit coupling result in breaking the degeneracy in energy levels for different values of l corresponding to a single principal quantum number n .
the differences between the values of e/m for the cathode and positive rays are very remarkable .
color relationships , values , intensities ; complementary colors , illumination , similar topics .
tell that old woman to clear out in double quick time if she values her place. ” beyond the door , free from his watching eyes , she buried her face in her hands with a groan of agony .
these latter values , which could be envisaged as overarching all groups in society , related to areas of life which those living in australia needed to know , if they were to be free to participate in mainstream public life , rather than disadvantaged or marginalised .
sct explains that meanings , emotions , values , and the motives for action are in the communication contexts by people trying to make sense out of a common experience .
but he goes on and says , you see that he values not the loss , nor rebellion of the town of mansoul , nor will he trouble himself with calling of his town to a reckoning for their giving of themselves to me .
she was much affected by the death of her sister teresa , who had appealed to angela to reconsider her worldly values .
formally , each piece can be represented as a vector of values , one per partner .
the native pronunciation of these three characters ( disregarding their tonal values ) is .
typically used in a setting where a patient has the blood pressure and heart rate monitored constantly , vasoactive drug therapy is typically " titrated " to achieve a desired effect or range of values as determined by competent clinicians .
converted values are shown in parentheses .
one set of values changes the writing system until the next writing system indicator or end-of-line .
the focus for the academy is characterised by an ethos which values education , high achievements and success .
ebbinghaus does not accept fechner 's presentation of the case , but refers us to delbœuf from whose experiments alone , he says , the correct interpretation of negative values of sensations can be derived .
now this integral is a continuous function of its upper limit x , and therefore there is a value of x in the interval , for which it takes any particular value between the greatest and least values that it has .
our countries understand the dangers posed by tyranny and the special responsibility of democracies to defend our shared values .
other potential issues include wildlife disruption , dust , odor , noise pollution , and reduced local property values .
in shallow , plant-rich pools there may be great fluctuations of oxygen , with extremely high concentrations occurring during the day due to photosynthesis and very low values at night when respiration is the dominant process of primary producers .
therefore , i set of to find another formula of absolute values .
crank-nicolson scheme , are unconditionally stable for all values of the time step it is more important to ensure that all coefficients are positive for physically realistic and bounded results .
stark 's principal conjecture has been proven in various special cases , including the case where the character defining the l-function takes on only rational values .
this is used to get a value , or a comma separated list of them if multiple values existp .
under any circumstances , it is unquestionably beneficial to any private buyer to take some pains to arrive at at least a general knowledge of values , as well as of the bearings and extent of the field which he may choose .
one always comes back to this fundamental fact when making any comparison of relative values in men or in machines .
his most recent book , in the jaws of the dragon , argues that china is not converging to western values but rather is following the confucian econo-political model pioneered by japan and characterized by aggressive mercantilism as well as a state-directed economy .
he seems to have enhanced entertainment values and emphasized instruction at the same time .
thus , while a source of additional value to the _aggregate_ of wealth , it probably reduces the values of given items .
for the ( highly unusual ) situation where the complex-valued probability amplitude is to be replaced by some other field taking on values in some other mathematical space , the i would be replaced by the appropriate geometric factor ( that is , the jacobian ) for that space .
the chip contains a file ( sod ) that stores hash values of all files stored in the chip ( picture , fingerprint , etc .
curve of fusion. -- there is still another univariant system of the one component water , the existence of which , at definite values of temperature and pressure , the phase rule allows us to predict .
but before i proceed with this exposition of values , i should like to ask you a question or two .
the significance of various values of the i q is set forth elsewhere .
the following table gives the composition of the two layers , and the values are represented graphically in fig .
the specific values usually discussed in educational theories coincide with aims which are usually urged .
intrinsic values are not objects of judgment , they can not ( as intrinsic ) be compared , or regarded as greater and less , better or worse .
paraguayan culture , history , language , pedagogy , and values in an educational program for united states , international , and paraguayan students alike .
`` of the great modern italian composers , i feel that puccini is the most important , because he has a more intimate appreciation of theatrical values .
these values are sentimental , historical , and possibly to the military student , educational .
if the central idea of this poem is that success comes from self-control and a true sense of the values of things .
this is francis 's formula , in which the coefficient of discharge c is much more nearly constant for different values of l and h than in the ordinary formula .
the highest rural values can not be bought or sold .
a winner acquires points based on these values , which correspond to a points-value table .
the plugs and sockets used to power electric stoves from a single-phase line have to be rated for greater current values than ones for three-phase system because all the power has to be transferred through a single line .
it is clear that these experiments give very small values for the coefficient .
on 31 july 1886 gabon issued its first stamps , which were surcharges on the existing stock , to cover shortages of the most-used values .
she asked him about the values of land in this neighbourhood and the possibilities of making such a place profitable .
by use of the percentage values ( table 2 ) , each bird was located in relation to the other birds .
also , the values in the name array are uninitialized , thus the call to gets is undefined .
the internal logic of grph is therefore based on the three-element heyting algebra as its truth values .
cwhich can be translated informally as " one ( or both ) of a or b is known to be true , but they both imply c , so regardless of the truth values of a and b we can conclude c .
along with this world , these cults of the beyond repudiate also the previously existent values of this world .
the earliest dies of the halfpenny and penny values were re-engraved at least twice , but not until the small head was replaced by the larger profile bust could they be considered even passable .
each local community the assessment of ( township , county , or city ) has one or more tax asessors , who endeavor to ascertain by inquiry values or inspection the value of each citizen 's property .
the retrograde inversion is the values of the inversion numbers read backwards .
but the dollar and the silver pieces regarded as fractions of a dollar had no less than five different values . ''
he has the highest attack power in the game , along with a great radial attack range and good speed , jump and dash , but also the worst defensive values and low hp .
an intuitive sense of values , tends to make emerson use social , political , and even economic phenomena , as means of expression , as the accidental notes in his scale -- rather than as ends , even lesser ends .
the men , with a true sense of values , had contented themselves with covering jim starr with a blanket , and then had ridden the rim for some miles in both directions looking for a trail .
just remember above all else that my values are very different from robert or us , and it is difficult to tell you how i feel .
the group positions itself as " conservative " and defines itself as the vanguard of upholding traditional values against the " trends of radical libertarianism , feminism and extreme individualism " in modern society .
the mahatma 's father cared little for wealth and material values , and left scarcely any to his family , having given almost everything away to charity .
both assume that monetization creates a commercial demand for the metals , thereby enhancing their values ; that the use of gold and silver as money substances has been one of choice with us instead of necessity ; and that legal-tender laws create value .
the nearest neighbor algorithm selects the value of the nearest point and does not consider the values of neighboring points at all , yielding a piecewise-constant interpolant .
but i at least can find no critical abacus on which , by totting up the values of both , i can make one greatly outvalue the other .
publishers also found it difficult to convince advertisers of the relative values of their publication for the purpose of advertising .
from gaugings by humphreys and abbot , bazin and baumgarten , the values c = 0.919 , 0.922 and 0.925 are obtained .
but ... if only she showed a little more appreciation of values apart from my career ; if only you could imagine mary sometimes speaking of being a daughter and being a sister .
the views of socrates on the proper order of society are certainly contrary to athenian values of the time and must have produced a shock effect , intentional or not , accounting for the animosity against him .
tccpd combines proactive , reactive , and educational law enforcement services for the campus where diverse social , cultural , and academic values are allowed to develop and prosper .
there would be a great and increasing surplus revenue from the taxation of land values for material progress , which would go on with great accelerated rapidity , would tend constantly to increase rent .
they do not want to lose their moral values , despite the bloom of modern culture .
these correspond to bit values 00b and 01b in the vga 's miscellaneous register .
he also values it over many synthetic languages and their writing systems in the world .
soils with ph values that are higher than 7 .
balanced ternary is unusual in having the digit values 1 , 0 and -1 .
but the conflict may lead to a reëxamination of the presuppositions of each value , to a process of bringing each into more organic relation to the whole system of values .
cit._ , for a brief discussion of negative values ( pp .
in fact , the way in which the subobject classifier classifies subobjects of a given object is by assigning the values true to elements belonging to the subobject in question , and false to elements not belonging to the subobject .
i believe the image has high encyclopedia and educational values .
no doubt he had in mind the native scale of values .
our challenges may be new , the instruments with which we meet them may be new , but those values upon which our success depends , honesty and hard work , courage and fair play , tolerance and curiosity , loyalty and patriotism -- these things are old .
if this be done , we shall find that each of the experiments yields a different quotient ; the first gives 0·336 , and the last 0·262 , while the other experiments give results between these extreme values .
the ultimate goal of sensor array signal processing is to estimate the values of parameters by using available temporal and spatial information , collected through sampling a wavefield with a set of antennas that have a precise geometry description .
now is it your view that all this is but clumsy lying , and that in reality it is the poor people of new york as of other large cities that own the bulk of its land values ?
now , barber had expressed the opinion that this value was to be reckoned in _millions_ ; but , the eight chests notwithstanding , i regarded this estimate as enormously exaggerated , the result , probably , of ignorance of values on barber 's part .
for example , the property values returned from scroll bar and trackbar accessible objects can indicate percentages in strings .
the ethical application of the philosophy of _idées-forces_ is at once theoretical and practical , that philosophy being concerned both with ideas and values .
i picked three random pixels from the images and compared their rgb values ( red-green-blue ) .
we made our decisions in the light of these values .
unlike euclidean angle , it takes values from and equals to 0 for antiparallel vectors .
it 's about forcing the values of the minority onto the majority , effectively locking the majority into the proverbial closet .
these are money values .
okonkwo strives to make his way in a culture that traditionally values manliness .
pippi 's rebellious behaviour at first sparked resistance among some defenders of cultural values , but eventually she was accepted , and with that children 's literature was freed from the obligation to promote moralism .
defn : a gold or silver coin , of various kinds and values , formerly current in india .
schumpeter thinks that the success of capitalism will lead to a form of corporations and a fostering of values , especially among intellectuals , of hostility to capitalism .
saker-tí was a collective of young writers committed to democratic values and to revaluing guatemala 's native cultural legacy .
this means institutions like family and school , which mediate belief systems and values between an older generation and its successor .
notdemocracy human values meant to be kept becasue that is what we are , and this values is what maintains peace within us .
thom upheld presbyterian values throughout his life , kept active in church affairs , and became a staunch prohibitionist .
this similarity makes up the substratum of tv images , as well as the substratum of fashion trends , new rituals , and new values , as transitory as all these prove to be .
ritschel 's work is easily recognized by this robust , healthy tone ; it reveals sound values and intimate study .
hence it appears that mr gibber ( who values himself on subscribing to the english translation of homer's iliad ) had not that merit with respect to the odyssey , or he might have been better instructed in the greek punology. -- p .
there are numerous measurement settings which influence these resultant parameter values , which are mentioned below .
a timer can have its over state ( time-out occurred ) as its most significant control value ; other values could be stopped , running etc .
according to a bank appraiser 's opinion negroes do not understand values , and they are often led to purchase a building at much more than its worth .
square roots are represented as √ ( values ) .
parallels above the equator describe this circuit in lighter values , and parallels below trace it in darker values .
the confusion of ethical values here is so palpable as scarcely to call for comment .
q values are also featured in particle physics .
but the machines here described are of a different character : they exhibit their results by values of a continuously varying quantity .
he is aware that speed and quantity , the key values in an industrial civilization , are not the only values that ever have been , or ever should be cherished by mankind .
and above all , you look into the values of men 's lands , wherefore the lords of manors do reckon their tenants to a higher rent , and therefore not only i but many poore tenants have good cause to speak against the profession ' .
some low-end cameras can only reliably read these values from dx encoded film cartridges because they lack the extra electrical contacts that would be needed to read the complete series .
an important challenge of such a system is that it relies upon the timely revaluation of all investments to arrive at the unit values .
colors were defined using either rgb or hsv values in a peculiar dec format .
every day the magnetician attends to the lamp and changes papers ; also at prearranged times he tests his `` scale values '' or takes a `` quick run . ''
b._ this difficulty will be of very short duration : you have only to be careful , that when you represent weights and velocities by numbers , the denominations or values of the weights and spaces , must not be changed .
this is used to ensure that listening lin nodes with a main-clock differing from the set bus baud rate in specified ranges will detect the break as the frame starting the communication and not as a standard data byte with all values zero ( hexadecimal 0x00 ) .
in a great variety of ways a genuine rural culture is being developed , with its own special characteristics and enduring values .
for instance , 10-sided dice can be rolled in pairs to produce a uniform distribution of random percentages ; and summing the values of multiple dice will produce approximations to normal distributions .
a correction profile can then be built using the difference between the camera result values and the known reference values .
the following table , summarized from the _handbook to the imperial institute cotton exhibition_ , 1905 , giving the length of staple and value on one date ( january 16 , 1905 ) , will serve to indicate the _comparative_ values of some of the principal commercial cottons .
on 9 september 2012 , pistorius was shortlisted by the ipc for the whang youn dai achievement award as a competitor " who is fair , honest and is uncompromising in his or her values and prioritises the promotion of the paralympic movement above personal recognition " .
a reversion of values may constitute a falsehood .
you can go into the data repository to get actual weight values .
and , rather than question our own values and our own grasp of reality , we instinctively , and , as i think , very healthily , incline to doubt the sincerity of the representative of this new standpoint which is offensive to us .
comparative values .
pre-dose values were obtained prior to the exposure .
this includes fostering the wisest use of our land and water resources , protecting our fish and wildlife , preserving the environmental and cultural values of our national parks and historical places , and providing for the enjoyment of life through outdoor recreation .
all the pity went out of me , and i felt only a blind sense of irritation at the artificial values , the feminine lack of grasp , the ignorance of the true proportions of life .
if a country is not founded on these notions , then it would be futile for us to speak about these values .
`` um , '' said the parson ; `` i doubt if he values the married state as he ought . ''
express f in terms of c , and compute f for the values c = 30 and c = 28 .
while these values may greatly vary between species , they are the same for each member of that species .
few from this womb are born that to maturity arrive ; it is here that all values end and it is here that they all begin .
( 1 ) the economic process supplies men with goods for their bodily wants and with many of the necessary means for satisfying intellectual , æsthetic , and social needs ; property represents permanence and security in these same values .
in quantum chemistry , slater 's rules provide numerical values for the effective nuclear charge concept .
so in this case the answer for the marginal probability can be found by summing p ( h , l ) for all possible values of l , with each value of l weighted by its probability of occurring .
here was evidently a man who had often stormed the iron walls of the city of success , and who now sometimes valued himself as the rabbit values his prowess .
nevertheless in the african tradition , stories were meant to instill values in the children .
hoeffding inequality ( named after kazuoki azuma and wassily hoeffding ) gives a concentration result for the values of martingales that have bounded differences .
the table also suggests a slight diminution in m since 1845 , but it is open to doubt whether the apparent change exceeds the probable error in the calculated values .
this will be particularly exemplified when we treat of international values ; that is , of the terms of interchange between things produced in different countries , or , to speak more generally , in distant places .
later perhaps , much later , when a few centuries are gone by , humanity , more learned in the meaning of its life , in the origins and values of its instincts , in the mechanism of heredities , may essay new lawgivings .
apart from the arithmetical and logical proofs that we have been given already , mathematicians may prefer the following more general form of presentation which avoids the purely arbitrary values of a concrete numerical example .
checked pages are those i checked , all pages are values extrapolated from the checked pages .
it is not advisable to aim at representing the true tone values .
he has passed through omaha and chicago to washington in his war-paint , ornamented with eagle's feathers , buffalo-skins , horse-hair , bears ' claws , and trophies of his skill , which he values more highly than a brigadier the stars upon his shoulders !
abuse , on the other hand , requires us to place values on which kinds of uses ( if any ) are allowable or not , and as such , words like that should be avoided .
alternatively , the values of the behavioural traits are not maximized by directional selection , but rather are under the influence of stabilizing selection .
his scholarly efforts concerned industrial relations and labor economics , the economies of corporations and corporate planning , national planning , and social values and corporate social responsibility .
( 015-ps ) rosenberg himself estimated that the values involved would come close to a billion dollars ( 090-ps ) .
either the values drop as the ore body increases in volume , or the vein will pinch out , perhaps never to be rediscovered .
they will recognize the true relation of men to the primal process ; and be amazed that for so long the greater values have been lost sight of in favor of the less .
on the other hand , with larger values for each of the parameters above , n may be greater than 1 .
january at the conclusion of the first chogm , the assembled commonwealth heads of government issue the singapore declaration , setting out the core political values of the commonwealth .
in traditional canny edge detection algorithm , there will be two fixed global threshold values to filter out the false edges .
whether the arrangement of these marginal inscriptions is a special one for each value , or whether each style described exists in all values there does not seem to be material enough at hand to determine .
alpha ( α ) and beta ( β ) represent lower and upper bounds for child node values at a given tree depth .
other groups support not only the pro-life cause but the broader family values cause , such as family research council , focus on the family , american family association , and concerned women for america , among many others .
if he does not enjoy his work he values too highly the privileges that success in it will bring to him .
a sense of entitlement stands in for personal values .
ipcri endeavored to implement this program in order to equip high school students , mature enough to deal with the difficult subject matter , with conflict resolution skills and the values of peace , respect , and human rights .
at the beginning of 2006 russia greatly increased the price of gas for ukraine to bring it inline with market values .
however , a spokesman for gaza 's ministry of interior denied such a campaign , and denied interfering in the lives of gaza citizens , but explained that " maintaining the morals and values of the palestinian society is highly required .
this , as i believe , is a profound mistake that is dependent on industrial values .
his art conception is based in the reconstruction of the new values lost from ancient art which remains in every time and sharing those with post modern ones created from picasso .
the worker should be able to view doctrines , values and actions from the point of view of the buddhist and his past history .
such importations were based upon coin values , and the tax levied upon them was properly required to be paid in coin .
the result value need not depend on all ( or any ) of the argument values .
an extension of this belief is the idea that the anzacs set an example for future generations of australians to follow , laying the bedrock of ' australian values ' .
thus , a roman who displayed their gravitas , constantia , fides , pietas and other values becoming a roman would possess dignitas among their peers .
the problem is simply stated as , " most intrinsics returning , or computing values based on , date information are prone to year-10,000 ( y10k ) problems , due to supporting only 4 digits for the year .
built-in image upload with automatically resize of the images to pre-set values .
so the function f is defined for all real a , and for integer values of a it equals the derivative no a , so you may use f for defining a fractional derivative .
by the very values the failures do not represent , however , browning gave us a vision of his own ideals .
the index takes into consideration the country 's specific buddhist cultural and spiritual values when developing and measuring the impact of socioeconomic development policies .
the values assigned to the coefficient b1 in france , are those determined by d'arcy .
colors can be identified by their unique rgb and hsv values ( see list of colors ) .
`` i much prefer what mr. lancaster reads his-self , an ’ it ’ s the kind thought i values far more than the amusingness of the paper .
i visited other values and they have also as much .
a good test of relative cheapness is the value of the coin most generally useful ; in poland these were the brass 'banns , ' worth about a penny farthing in to-day 's values .
if the number of stages missed is known however , the weighting of values in the average can be adjusted to give equal weight to all missed samples to avoid this issue .
using two values , paint one in a high key , and the other in a low key .
this has the advantages of being universal and producing maximum gi values of approximately 100 .
the social aspect of the project is achieved by the deconstruction of stereotypes , overcoming of nationalism , racism , xenophobia , homophobia , the gory legacy of the past and through the affirmation of cultural values that are in a complete state of disarray in local transitional societies .
war is accordingly a servile art and not essentially liberal ; whatever inherent values its exercise may have would better be realised in another medium .
noc functions the same as this template , but with the base and primary values reversed .
with reasonable values for the scalar potential , the size of the extra dimension is large enough to solve the hierarchy problem .
this quantity is now , as the result of further experiments , added to the values of h , and also represented in the formula for the specific heat itself by the cubic term .
bi-directional replication is the result of merely doing another replication with the source and target values swapped .
certain considerations must be made , and the weaknesses of these values understood , so that erl and erm screening levels are used properly .
as a result , and because they 'd " existed nowhere " on a large scale in " the premodern world " , wilber refers to these values and rights " as the dignity of modernity " [ emphasis in original ] .
the agile up conforms to the values and principles of the agile software development and the agile alliance .
( com ) a traffic in bills of exchange ( see arbitration of exchange ) ; also , a traffic in stocks which bear differing values at the same time in different markets .
in his first book , culture and religion in merovinmgian gaul , ad 481-751 ( leiden , 1995 ) hen has investigate the shared meanings , attitudes and values , and the symbolic forms in which they were expressed or embodied in merovingian society .
the german automaker of mercedes-benz vehicles was accused of violating the terms of the united nations ' oil for food program with iraq by including kickbacks 10 percent of the contract values to the iraqi government .
it is also possible to calculate the constant of the high scale if the constant of the low scale be known , together with the values of the resistances corresponding to the two scales ; for from the equation previously given .
the values of the output of bddc in the interior of the subdomains are then obtained by repeating the interior correction .
i found this article while looking for information regarding conservatism and , by extention , anything related to political beliefs and values .
furthermore , they often rely heavily on parameters values used by the modellers .
what is , in comparison , the success of a man of science , especially of one who writes within a limited territory for a public that neither reads nor values him , and who is read by four or five -- rivals and opponents !
the use of the latter is recommended by filsinger as a preliminary test for cacao butter , since with a normal refraction it is not necessary to proceed further and determine the iodine , saponification and acid values , nor the melting point .
a most comprehensive chart showing the relative values of various fodders and feeding stuffs has been prepared by herbert myrick , editor of _american agriculturist_ , and will afford a good many valuable hints to the farmer who wishes to feed his swine intelligently .
of course , the language dictionary is a well known model for mapping the values in one context , a language , to another .
the test of scarlet was discovering chivalrous values in tubby of which he himself was only partly aware .
furthermore , raju complained to a prominent ethics society in india -- the society for scientific values -- and after consulting three independent experts and also corresponding with atiyah , the society declared that it found the complaint valid .
as opposed to continuous optimization , the variables used in the mathematical program ( or some of them ) are restricted to assume only a finite or discrete set of values , such as the integers .
an event situated on revealing the essential values of islam to the western community as a whole .
eighteen values are known , and all of these are rare .
walker test was widely used , but the test conditions chosen were unrealistic , and impossibly high values for the coefficient were claimed by disinfectant manufacturers .
: flag : n. a variable or quantity that can take on one of two values ; a bit , particularly one that is used to indicate one of two outcomes or is used to control which of two things is to be done .
unlike in integer basic and applesoft ii , the boolean operators and , or and not perform bitwise operations on 16-bit integer values .
the foregoing narrative account of the general field and office handling of the michigan appraisal of physical property , while not touching on matters of principle of valuation , except as to land values , is submitted as describing briefly the machinery of the appraisal .
the next point to note is that our conscious experiences and activities themselves have not only their intrinsic value , as they pass , but an extrinsic value , as means toward future intrinsic values .
in addition , the software also automatically recalibrates the pwi values for the peak , slope , reflow , and soak processes .
she would rejoice , in the blush of the compliment he was paying her , that he had at last begun to comprehend the ultimate values !
some modern sata drives also report cylinder-head-sector ( chs ) values , but these are not actual physical parameters since the reported numbers are constrained by historic operating system interfaces .
but she had scant heart to mark its values or effect .
the expected value of a random variable is the weighted average of the possible values it might take on , with the weights being the respective probabilities .
acn values for selected aircraft have been calculated by the international civil aviation organization ( icao ) using two computer programs , one for rigid pavements and the other for flexible pavements .
this recognition is awarded each year for the best essay on appalachian life and literature , religion , folklore , culture , or values .
the current dri values differ from those used in nutrition labeling in the u .
when values vary , with equal probability on both sides , so far as our present knowledge goes , as in the case of cadmium ( 111.8 and 112.2 ) , the mean value is given in the table .
in january 2011 , bogusky and schuham partnered with designer john bielenberg to launch common , a creative community for accelerating social ventures under the shared values of a unified brand .
i have tried to demonstrate that , plastically , he did not understand women , and could not reproduce their form in art with sympathetic feeling for its values of grace , suavity , virginity , and frailty .
the lumbermen demand that all the increment of profit due to prosperous developments shall remain unto them ; in other words , that the carriers ' share of the increased values shall remain fixed .
the modern world is founded upon a denial of absolute values , a denial of religion , a denial of god ; upon such denials nothing can be built .
but , above all , religion must be catholic in its count of values .
they can be used for storing and looking up values using integer or string keys .
the pastoral industry was particularly prosperous , and as the war enhanced wool values and promised also to increase the price of meat , the state never had a brighter financial aspect .
paint them in values of ink or charcoal-gray .
ivo , pope john paul ii said , " the values proposed by st ivo retain an astonishing timeliness .
the reckoning day must come for all inflated values , whether of paper , of silver , or of gold ; and when that day comes someone will suffer .
wikipedia is a balance between personal approaches and interests , within a framework of common values and policies .
the orbit had not yet been completely observed , so the values quoted were lower limits .
i want to format some text to put each character in its own bordered box , making the characters look kind of like individual scrabble tiles ( without the letter values ) .
it is not worth while to lay down rules for judging the investment value of such stocks , because the general principles advanced in the preceding chapters will be found sufficient for a judgment of their values .
again the district between the laubach and the weser , we meet with values stated in _silver solidi_ of 20 to the pound , _i.e._ of twelve pence .
this curve with the values reduced from metres to feet is reproduced below .
another major book was kitab surat al-ard ( " the image of the earth " ; translated as geography ) , presenting the coordinates of places based on those in the geography of ptolemy but with improved values for the mediterranean sea , asia , and africa .
all the following are approximate values used for convenience .
food values in order to arrive at the food value of any commodity it is necessary to consider its chemical composition , available potential energy , absorbability , etc .
if the french had simply been vanquished we should have had a tremendous fall , but at the news of the surrender values are rising enormously .
the frequent mixture of old and new forms in cuneiform writings and the different values sometimes given to the same sign , have increased the difficult task of interpretation .
this allows the pilot to fly against a machine with known performance values and allows aircrew to build their awareness of important concepts such as sight picture , rates of closure and line of sight rates that are cues to being successful in the visual arena .
from this known initial-series value the initial-series values of the other dates on altar 5 may be obtained by calculation .
your daily values may be higher or lower depending on your calorie needs .
it is true for all sufficiently large values of n .
even then , the one with the balcony next to it requires to be toned down in its strong values , and so the shadows here are made much lighter , the walls being kept white .
bcs states that its mission is to prepare young people to live fully for god in a rapidly changing world , with the ability to understand , evaluate , and transform their world from the foundation of god 's unchanging values .
saturation arithmetic also enables overflow of additions and multiplications to be detected consistently without an overflow bit or excessive computation , by simple comparison with the maximum or minimum value ( provided the datum is not permitted to take on these values ) .
translation is an almost mechanical activity which produces a quinean translation manual that relates sequences of words in such a way that their truth values are conserved .
the only danger is that his meditations may be broken in upon by sellers of coins and scraps of all ages , dates , and values .
in general it was found that property values in the districts where negroes usually buy are affected by more factors than is the property in districts where whites usually buy .
the leader of norway 's catholic church at the time , johannes olav fallize , was adamant that new churches should reflect traditional norwegian architecture and pious values , and børve was seen as the perfect man for the job .
each of those integer values represent a frequency and the corresponding complex value tells you the amplitude and phase of the sine with that frequency .
he reflected on it , but clumsily , as with a mind too long trained in the rigid values of stocks and shares , buying and selling , hard figures that knew not elasticity .
this feeling should not be confounded with the very old feeling of chinese as a culturally superior group according to which , at least in theory though rarely in practice , every person who assimilated chinese cultural values and traits was a '' chinese '' .
art , in garments and ornament , in dance and epithalamium , lends ideal values .
her part in the child will contain the inherence of these new higher evolutionary values , as the father 's part in it will contain the inherence of the concrete powers he has developed .
the foundation aims to preserve communal unity , family values , youth programs and regional natural resources .
this shrub grows wild in the territory of misiones and in the republics of paraguay and brazil ; and argentina and uruguay import it from the latter countries to annual values of several millions of gold dollars .
thoughts and ideas and things had lost half their values to him .
the most important of the cases to which mathematical methods can be applied are those in which the terms of the series are the values , taken at stated intervals ( regular or irregular ) , of a continuously varying quantity .
the society aims at promoting the values of a free-market economy and individual liberty to the icelandic public .
it is clear that for bartos all ethical , aesthetic , social values are part of this circulation , just as academic philosophy .
but even these are tainted ; d'artagnan 's action ends up going against the values he would have prized , had he known the truth , and the events in the grotto cost porthos his life .
idi 's primary areas of concern are structural reforms , democratic values , and identity and solidarity .
since ellipsometry is measuring the ratio ( or difference ) of two values ( rather than the absolute value of either ) , it is very robust , accurate , and reproducible .
integers may be either signed ( allowing negative values ) or unsigned ( nonnegative values only ) .
distributed computing ( boinc ) project that verifies the collatz conjecture for larger values .
the camera has the ability to convert this range of values to those from zero to 255 .
the difference in the values of 1,000 and 1,500 seems to have had less weight with the guessers than a difference of 50 had at any place below 1,000 .
the party hopes to achieve separation by democratic means but will work within the canadian system initially to defend western values and interests .
the second meaning of normal score is associated with data values derived from the ranks of the observations within the dataset .
one definition conveys no notion of the operations of mining , but is merely geological , while the other involves the thought of the recovery of values .
thoughts and values in reasonable order .
those who buy stocks judiciously , selecting choice securities whose value is well known , buying when values are depressed , and selling when sufficient advance occurs to give them a good profit .
the values ( in rupees ) of the exports in 1879 were 13,000 from bushire , 73,500 from lingah , and 35,000 from bahrein .
australian prime minister julia gillard said , " she was of course one of the great opera voices of the 20th century , " adding that dame joan showed a lot of " quintessential australian values .
hence it is the same thing to speak of _norms and values , _ or of universal concepts , surpassing and containing in themselves each single thing .
bush stressed his energy credentials and conservative values in the campaign .
he believed that these aspects should be transformed into positive humanistic values of a new communist morality , instead of destroying religion outright when it served as the psychological and moral basis for millions of people .
for this purpose , the values of periods pr , pb , and pm correspond to the distances between the lines along the axis of movements ( the vertical axis in the animated example of figure 4 ) .
the alleged diffusion of culture has raised concern over the endurance of cultural norms and values , sociopolitical institutions and frameworks , or even cultural preferences and traditions in a context of increasing foreign presence .
religious orders ( generally catholic ) use the word to describe their spiritual orientation and any special characteristics of their mission or values that might be exhibited as a result of the vows that they have taken and the orientation of the order to which they belong .
it is easy to remain a common bar of iron , or comparatively so , by becoming merely a horseshoe ; but it is hard to raise your life-product to higher values .
as the national security strategy highlights , we live in an age with tremendous opportunities to foster a world consistent with interests and values embraced by the united states and freedom-loving people around the world .
patients with a high tumor burden may also have somewhat reduced levels of cholesterol , cholesterol levels return to more normal values with successful treatment of hcl .
on the other , as alert , but younger , with the easy _sang froid_ of one skilled in this battle of values , stood page .
boundary values ( drawn only for the overflow case ) are being shown as the orange line in the right hand side figure .
i am frequently asked by round table correspondents whether it would be a good speculation to buy the lower values of the columbian issue , which are still on sale at many post-offices .
the difficulty of finding an enduring scale of values which will retain the adherence of both interests amidst industrial movements which continually tend to upset the previously accepted `` fair rates , '' is the deeper economic cause which breaks down many of these attempts .
memories and emotions surged through his mind ; for the most vivid sensations of his youth had focused about this spot , and it was here he had first begun to live and learn values .
these concealed values actually may take several forms ; they may be concerned with materials and processes , or with construction and design .
when the cvt is set to higher values it operates conventionally , with increasing forward ratios .
it is when religion refuses to learn that she is harmful ; because her values are false and her thought retrospective that she is inadequate .
natural frequencies depend only on network topology and element values but not the input .
these values give a calculated specific gravity varying from 3 .
under a " median interpretation " , this exposure is permissible , and even required , for the sake of the domination of torah values over one 's worldly matters .
forum participants discussed cooperation in the euro-atlantic areas , the new democracies success stories , the european union 's role in spreading the values of democracy , and other issues .
it is an open-ended scale , but the most commonly used values are 6 , 20 , 40 , 100 , and 200 .
the history of the past , the religion of the present , the science of the future -- all ideas were transmuted , all values reversed by this new and wonderful hypothesis .
all scale values in illustration captions retained .
reaction formation is the reaction from status frustration , and the young men of the lower classes find themselves replacing their society 's norms and values with alternative ones .
feminist archaeology has critiqued the uncritical application of modern , western norms and values to past societies .
“ no such change of values can occur without cost .
despite progressive legal reforms in many parts of the region , strong patriarchal values are maintained and help perpetuate the subordination of women .
it is not accurate since it gets numerical values from different sources not following the same metodology .
especially , have the same feelings , values , and hopes .
the idea persisted , however , that the electron in fact has a definite position and spin , and that qm 's weakness is its inability to predict those values precisely .
when a relation of two continuously varying values of the form a = f ( b ) is conjectured , we convince ourselves of its truth by observing for different values of a the corresponding values of b , or reversely .
we compromise our values and our mission .
by the values here mentioned alone i was worth more than a million dollars .
even free labor , in so far as it survived slave labor , was forced to take its measure of values from the slave .
the crowding of pittsburgh 's business district has resulted in exceedingly high land values .
while it may seem like it is possible to simply add or subtract the heat transfer values to or from each other , this will yield inaccurate results .
property values in the town and village of ellicottville are , as a result , much higher than the rest of the county .
) , the separation of the optic axes in biaxial crystals , due to the fact that the axial angle has different values for the different colors of the spectrum .
the association works to inspire jewish values in its member coaches to always work and coach with integrity and to serve as role models to their players and in their communities .
it may be objected ( see above ) that this defines merely the extension of a property , and says nothing about what causes the property to hold for exactly those values .
now that , again , may be life , -- mr. winston churchill , for example , should know better than i , -- but it is certainly a world with the sense of values gone wrong .
their views are governed by values of collectivism and fairness .
concluding remarks in the criticism of philosophy 378 the will to power an attempted transvaluation of all values by friedrich nietzsche translated by anthony m. ludovici vol .
retail price indicies are not useful for interrogating production prices or aggregate values .
second essential of news writing.= -- as explained in the preceding chapter , the first essential in news writing is a proper appreciation of news and news values .
purchasers inquire the position of the gardens from which the samples were taken ; teas from the summit of a hill , from the middle , and from the base bearing different values .
`` you do n't mean to try to promote a hotel against such inflated values ! ''
the report shows the portfolio priority with its items and their values for the predicted commercial value and the net present value ; this is compared to planned and specific cost ( s ) .
these values are 56 , 55 , which generators give the last triangle .
it may take real or imaginary values .
in consequence , the thing that is to be avoided above everything is further experimentation -- the continuation of the state in which values are fluent , and are tested , chosen and criticized _ad infinitum_ .
such ideological opposition makes the nazis angry , and it also makes them uncomfortable , since they do hold enough values in common with the danes to understand perfectly the implications of the danish jibes .
it is his intention to teach children important values such as sportsmanship and dedication , both on and off the baseball diamond .
`` it depends , sir , '' the man answered quietly , `` at what price mr. morrison values his life ! ''
=the changing values of english speech= a mate to the worth of words .
the letters of the major variants of the tajik alphabet are presented below , along with their phonetic values .
and no man values what comes to him cheaply .
a useful and not unusual addition to this is a statement of the absolutely largest and smallest values of each element recorded during each day , with the precise times of their occurrence .
in a large number of cases , the fixed modes of life and practice which are our inheritance come to be regarded as symbols of eternal and changeless values .
kirchhoff integral theorem , uses green 's theorem to derive the solution to the homogeneous wave equation at an arbitrary point p in terms of the values of the solution of the wave equation and its first order derivative at all points on an arbitrary surface which encloses p .
many of the other formulas for special values of hypergeometric functions can be derived from this as special or limiting cases .
to begin with , commodities which are use-values by nature , acquire a form in which they _appear_ in idea to each other as exchange values , as definite quantities of incorporated _universal_ labor-time .
the kalman filter calculates estimates of the true values of states recursively over time using incoming measurements and a mathematical process model .
without comparing the values of the higher and the lower elements , how is it ever possible to know what they are and what they mean ?
in this sense , engineering can be considered a social as well a technological discipline and judged not just by whether its artifacts work , in a narrow sense , but also by how they influence and serve social values .
the function values are no longer very useful when a computer is available , but the large listing of formulas can still be very handy .
these limits are unreasonably wide ; i can not guess which is the more remote from the truth , but it can not be far removed from their mean values , and this may be accepted as roughly approximate .
the reason i was wanting to know was so as to set the relevant values when performing a transformation on other values .
if the first formula above is used , values can be less than zero .
he who conforms to them , who anticipates their mutations , gains great wealth -- but no business man dare set his personal values against them .
what i 'm saying , what i 'm always saying , dear , and trying my best to live , is that everybody must decide for himself when a general proposition applies to him , what to believe about his own life and its values .
the more traditional values may be regarded as irrelevant , antique or " un-fun " by those who have different experience , goals and cultural identity .
both films , the shining and poltergeist , involve horror being based on real-estate values .
all return values are returned on the stack .
introductory -- commercial and educational values of wood turning -- elements of success 9-10 chapter ii .
with scripture selections of exceptional suggestive values and a collection of poems of comfort both rare and striking the little volume will be greatly prized .
the average market price of flowers influences the wages paid to the gardener , his wages being but the sum of the values ( or of his contribution to the values ) of flowers , well-kept lawn , and garden products .
one may satisfy himself as to the first of these conditions by examining the name plates fastened to the transformers , whereon are stamped the values of the respective pressures and capacities of each .
`` only for its scientific values , '' i said .
all sorts of _imperatives_ have been used in order to make moral values appear as if they were for ever fixed : -- they have been enjoined for the longest period of time : they almost appear to be instinctive , like inner commands .
this range has significantly higher nutrition values compared to other popular brands .
these stories reflect the values of the community and illustrate how washingtonians are connected to each other and to the rest of the world .
many others will be needed to bring out the artistic and spiritual values of the poem and to keep the thread of the story in mind .
though non-denominational , the camp espouses " christian values " in its teachings and programs , not least of which is its motto , " the other fellow first " .
the dynamic range of an audio system is a measure of the difference between the smallest and largest amplitude values that can be represented in a medium .
unquestionably he was one of the boldest revaluers of traditional values ; and he was always a convinced advocate of the view that the inadequate powers of natural selection ought to be supplemented by the deliberate selection ( exclusion from reproduction ) of anti-social individuals .
it is better to have all accounting of values done in the accounting department .
until 2006 , property values in east harlem climbed along with those in the rest of new york city .
tournaments shortened to 36 holes are given reduced values of ten points for regular season events and the win is considered unofficial .
created by the alaska national interest lands conservation act in 1980 , the steese nca 's special values include birch creek national wild river , crucial caribou calving grounds and home range , and dall sheep habitat .
these algorithmic measures of complexity tend to assign high values to random noise .
that preceded it , however , the corresponding values were inserted in the spandrels , `` 6d .
long-term cultural impacts include a commitment to evangelical protestantism , a love of country music , political conservatism , and strong support for traditional moral and cultural values .
but if we look on religion as on a kind of poetry , as we have decided here to do , -- as on a kind of poetry that expresses moral values and reacts beneficently upon life , -- we shall see that the christian doctrine is alone justified .
what made me invent it was the constantly wanting stamps of other values , for foreign letters , parcel post , & c. , and finding it very bothersome to get at the kind i wanted in a hurry .
the new religion only values and lays stress on life , on `` morality lived '' ; doctrine and dogma must be laid aside ; and thus von egidy arrives at the remarkable paradox of `` a religion without dogma or confession . ''
mata ji was responsible for the upbringing of the seventh guru and infused the spiritual values of the house of guru nanak , the founder of sikhism .
a function that can evaluate to or be applied to values of different types is known as a polymorphic function .
the units in each regiment also have different values and characteristics in their attack , defense , and health .
starting with these middle points in the scales of value and chroma , they learn to estimate rightly all lighter and darker values , all weaker and stronger chromas , and gradually build up a disciplined judgment of color .
we become aware of spiritual values in behalf of which at need physical existence must be willingly laid down ; and words like honor , love , fidelity , and service in our hours of insight have halos over them that poorer moods can not discern .
the relation to the old gods had been in its essence a contract for protection and good crops , in return for certain tangible values sacrificed .
the more i 've looked at this , the more i become convinced that you can 't write a generic call to fetch just the value of a given qualifier associated with a given property because of the possibility of multiple values .
as a boy i learned values .
“ the black pearl stick pin that mr. graham values so much has been stolen from his room. ” “ what have i to do with that ? ” drummond shouted .
to be sure , one of his rather arbitrary glories—the colour of his hair—might also appear a dubious point to those who rate racial laws higher than the values of personality .
ecofeminists believe that these connections are illustrated through traditionally " female " values such as reciprocity , nurturing and cooperation , which are present both among women and in nature .
we may set up a scale of `` hesitation values '' somewhat after this fashion : value 1 : factors 1 , 3 .
he values everything , whether useful or ornamental , by what it costs .
in the extraordinary scale of moral values unconsciously held by alex , there were apparently no abstract standards of right and wrong .
the third value in the triangle , 2 , is the sum of the two previous values above-left and left of it .
as we see , the entire system of ethical values was overturned .
die kantone nach ihren höchsten punkten various highest and lowest elevation values by canton ( village center , road or rail network , etc .
when the join-predicate is satisfied by matching non-null values , column values for each matched pair of rows of a and b are combined into a result row .
they suggest that technological optimists merely adhere to an alternative worldview that values the " exercise of reason in the service of free will " and the ability of technological developments to " serve human ends " .
instead of using this gesture for situations where there was an affinity of values she used it , on occasion , to further rapport .
the individual is frequently unaware of the array of feelings , values or memories of a singular place and simply becomes more comfortable or uncomfortable with certain broad kinds of physical settings , or prefers specific spaces to others .
capitalism without values , clint reilly on the predatory lending scandal .
no form of this scheme gives any quantitative values .
`` they crucify him who writeth new values on new tables ; they sacrifice _unto themselves_ the future ; they crucify the whole future of humanity !
i said that you always saw life through a stained-glass window and that it gave you distorted values , did n't i ?
for only they could attempt such a task who possess an informed and disciplined yet essentially intuitive spirit with its scale of values ; who by instinct can see their age as a whole and indicate its chief emphases , its controlling tendencies , its significant expressions .
the curve can also be shown in non-dimensional or standardized form by scaling elevation and area by the maximum values .
the hsv ( hue , saturation , value ) color space values , also known as hsb ( hue , saturation , brightness ) , and the hex triplets ( for html web colors ) are also given in the following table .
production values , particularly andrew sanders ' design and john bright 's costumes , are exquisite , but they decorate a film that 's too slow and only sporadically involving .
in consequence of some suspicion as to the accuracy of the compensation apparatus , the measurement was repeated four times , the operations being conducted so as to determine the actual values of the probable errors of the apparatus .
often these rate laws contain kinetic parameters with uncertain values .
improvements in the arts , effect upon distribution , 242-252 ; in habits of industry and thrift , will not relieve poverty , 301-308 ; upon land , their value separable from land values , 341-342 , 422-423 .
readjust the `` values , '' as painters say , and there you were !
_domain of a set of variables._ -- the numerical continuum of n dimensions ( c_n ) is the aggregate that is arrived at by attributing simultaneous values to each of n variables x1 , x2 , ... x_n , these values being any real numbers .
to prevent the paradox , sen suggests that " the ultimate guarantee for individual liberty may rest not on rules for social choice but on developing individual values that respect each other 's personal choices .
to score , count the values of each person 's hand .
the values of our domestic exports for the last fiscal year , as compared with those of the previous year , exhibit an increase of $ 43,646,322 .
roger 's pioneering program was one of the first to encourage children 's self-esteem , self-control , cooperation , ability to confront and deal with problems , appreciate diversity and other critical life values and behaviors .
harbour park entered the new millennium with a new look , whilst managing to retain the smart family values of providing a friendly , fun and entertaining family venue .
a miss indonesia should have eastern values in him .
the values of the function then form a `` sequence , '' u1 , u2 , ... u_n , ... , and this sequence can have a limit at n = [ oo ] .
bargaining also plays a role in the functioning and decision making of households , where agreements and decisions do not often have direct monetary values and affect various members of the household .
how different that early attitude from the penetrating criticism running through his '' literary values '' ; how different his stilted beginnings from his own limpid prose as we know it , to read which is to forget that one is reading !
this set of words contains many expressions that turn out to denote equal values in every lattice .
t is the set of fuzzy truth values ( the interval between zero an one ) .
i found a few references to values of about 1 s .
the school was founded on and continues to encourage a tradition of community participation and values .
this principle should prevail in the purchase of food : each constituent of which should have a certain value placed upon it ; and the sums of all the values of the constituents would then be the value of the article of food taken as a whole .
the fear of extremes , a certain confidence in the `` right way , '' no raving : a periodical self-habituation to narrower values ( such as `` mother-land , '' `` science , '' etc. ) .
the gradual decline in the ancient roman republican values of family , farming , virtus , and dignitas .
substituting these values in formula ( 1 ) 1,500 × 10.79 resistance = ———————————————————— = 1.559 ohms .
label position can be altered using where needed , valid values are bottom , left , right , top ; default is bottom .
to keep a majority of house seats in the 2000 election , watts advised republicans to moderate their language and criticized the party for creating the perception it favored a view of " family values that excluded single mothers .
see boston gear works , inc. mursell , james l. human values in music education .
the relative values of marks we still recognize , at least in large measure , the values given the marks by the greek grammarians ; and the principle is important in our study .
sad is a strong predictor of coronary disease , with higher values indicating increased risk independent of bmi .
relative values .
cloud cover values only vary by 0 .
that is , in one frame the one-way speed of light is chosen to be isotropic , while all other frames take over the values of this " preferred " frame by " external synchronization " .
men were the pieces with which he played his game -- they were of varied values , certainly , as are the pieces on a chess table , but they were pieces on the chess table and nothing more .
gay web monkey magazine , " a new voice in the great american debate about values " by the san francisco chronicle , and endorsed by glaad and gary zukav .
in essence data classification consists of using variables with known values to predict the unknown or future values of other variables .
the equation of a line in a plane involves two constants , either of which may take an infinite number of values .
moral values are generally negative , and always remote .
it had transpired that nearly all the volksraad 's members had received gifts in cash and values ranging each from £50 to £1,000 prior to voting the contract , but what was paid after voting did not become public at the time of exposure .
respective values of various styles .
prime minister michael somare paid tribute to him as " a humble man who dedicated his life to the development of a legal regime that incorporates melanesian values " .
he counted on their private and public values in society .
one definition has been " labels without postage stamp values , not good for postal service ; advertising labels or charity labels .
they are small when the sum of their values is small .
many applications exist in biochemistry ; for example , the pka values of proteins and amino acid side chains are of major importance for the activity of enzymes and the stability of proteins .
i , p. 129._ the supreme manifestation of social morality is always government and in formulating a politic , baha ullah most clearly earned our reverence as the prophet of modern society ... . democracy alone tends to vulgarize personal values , as the united states proves .
more precisely , after arc consistency is enforced , the number of unassigned variables must not exceed the number of values in the union of their domains .
it was necessary , therefore , that they should be transformed into other values , for commercial needs of importation and the financial relations between the colony and france .
to ensure accurate results , and consequently an appropriate course of action , readings may need to be taken every few days until fairly constant values are recorded .
with real variables on the axes , each point in the graph depicts the values of two real variables .
in sociology , the term is used with a focus on the social relationships involved in producing things commercially , and how this affects the consciousness and values of members of society .
that thought has a certain bias which can not be conveyed in words , yet the world values words as being the essence of books .
large values were recorded in terms of sestertium milia , thousands of sestertii , with the milia often omitted and implied .
the reciprocal lattice points are the values of momentum transfer where the bragg diffraction condition is satisfied and for diffraction to occur the scattering vector must be equal to a reciprocal lattice vector .
it is capable of presenting life as a connected whole and of showing the interplay of influences , the action of values on attitudes .
sm for the values of the dimension m from 1 up to 20 .
another picture shows exactly the same circuit constructed using russian military production teflon capacitors and non-inductive planar film resistors , of the same values .
in oblique values , of things seen out of the corner of one 's eyes .
for each row , the variable values shown are those after the indicated action ( s ) have completed .
the heart , that values less its ease than it adores thy ways , in thine avenging anger sees a subject of its praise .
trits arise , for example , in the context of a { flag } that should actually be able to assume *three* values -- such as yes , no , or unknown .
since the 1980s , bakersfield , porterville , fresno , visalia , tracy , modesto and many other towns and cities have exploded in both area and population , as housing values along the coast increased .
but it is not the antecedently existing values , _as_ antecedently existing , that give value to the new piece of wealth .
with multiple segment metering ( also known as matrix or honeycomb metering ) , the values of the different segments are combined and weighted to set the correct exposure .
furnadzhiev broke his association with " nov put " when members of the bcp condemned the september four for advancing values and ideas of the bourgeoisie in their works .
the second main theorem , more difficult than the first one , states roughly that there are relatively few values which the function assumes less often than average .
he has become thoroughly conversant with property values , readily recognizes a possible rise or diminution in realty prices and accordingly makes his investments so that he has secured good returns from his property holdings .
these , acquired from the late giottesque painter ( probably lorenzo monaco ) who had been his first master , he seems to have prized as artistic elements no less than the tactile values which he attempted to adopt later , serenely unconscious , apparently , of their incompatibility .
for example , the edge labeled x , y between c _ 1 and c _ 2 indicates that the dual problem contains a constraint between c _ 1 and c _ 2 , and this constraint enforces values ( tuples ) that match on x and y .
the loss in farm values in nearly all of the older states , as shown by the census records from 1880 to 1900 , varies from $ 1,000,000 to $ 160,000,000 in each state and aggregates the enormous total of more than $ 1,000,000,000 .
he values property for its uses , and is not selfish in money matters .
although associations to individual stimuli inevitably vary between individuals , associative values determined at group level , or by the determination of psychometric norms in previous studies , successfully predict variations in , for example , learning rates .
the tension between the mainstream traditional religious veneration of helios , which had become enriched with ethical values and poetical symbolism in pindar , aeschylus and sophocles , c .
it can also compare registers , immediate values and register indirect values .
the previous algorithm only backjumps when the values of a variable can be shown inconsistent with the current partial solution without further branching .
the standard is very useful in meteorology for comparison against actual values .
pressure-temperature diagram. -- in this diagram there are represented the values of the vapour pressure of the saturated solutions of chlorine and iodine .
methyl-mda has ic50 values of 783nm , 28,300nm , and 4,602nm for inhibiting the reuptake of serotonin , dopamine , and norepinephrine in rat synaptosomes .
top and bottom grinders can be controlled independently to reduce conicity values .
our best way is to calculate some values , and then plot it out as a curve .
b-c-d-e-f-f-g-a-b ) onto the 18 duration values , while the left hand twice states nine chords in the third mode .
the initial rank of the nth term of this sequence is the value r such that for exactly r values of i less than or equal to n .
the values of the amplitude response table slightly differ from those resulting from the circuit diagram , e .
the passengers were only too willing to instruct a stranger in the historical values of their country .
in this case , the subspace consists of all possible values of the vector x .
he has set his criterion of values outside the physical universe .
she has hosted forums and conferences promoting interfaith and intercultural discussion between clashing religious communities , bringing religious leaders together to discuss shared values and the importance of religious tolerance .
it diminishes greatly the values which can accrue from competition , and enhances immeasurably the non-competitive values .
we expect them to know why they teach this subject and that , that is , the educational values of the various subjects , and the best manner of administering this educational food .
metal particles , although very small , have very high values of coercivity and are the most resistant to print-through effects because their magnetic energy is seldom challenged by thermal energy .
it is true that , as tolstoy warns us , we easily slip into indefensible luxury under the pretence of maintaining the higher values .
* * * * * whatever respective values a future generation may set upon tennyson's work , there can be little doubt that he himself considered the _idylls of the king_ , with its inner spiritual meanings , as his greatest work .
he is obliged to analyse the forces which are operative around him , in science , in religion , and in art ; he is obliged to give the directions , to fix the values and the limits .
one object instance can change values of its instance variables without affecting all other instances .
the rotonda de las personas ilustres ( rotunda of illustrious persons ) is a site that honors those who are considered to have exalted the civic , national and human values of mexico .
the combination of legal training and management skills is increasingly in demand ; the collaboration reflects the two institutions ' values and a desire to prepare graduates for fulfilling careers and a positive societal role .
korean pop culture skillfully blends western and asian values to create its own , and the country itself is viewed as a prominent model to follow or catch up , both culturally and economically " .
when laws are enacted , they will represent the norms , values and interests of the dominant cultural or ethnic group which may produce border culture conflict .
goya did no injustice to velazquez ; he succeeded most felicitously in reproducing in these etchings not only the design , but the colour values and characteristic spirit of his model .
i went outside and sat on the bench with a better understanding of shoshone and people and values which come only from friendships closely knitted and help unselfishly given .
during the civil war some of barker 's horses were carried off for the service of the state , and he values them at £8 a piece , a fair price then .
i addressed the working-men in the largest hall and received a present from them as did mrs. carnegie also -- a brooch she values highly .
by its values and behaviors , the ad opposed the socialist left but also the right ( popular liberal action [ alp ] and later the republican federation ) .
we can strengthen our traditional values .
the student who has a true sense of values will plan her life in so systematic and orderly a way that her use of time will be determined by something more than present inclination .
when there is more than one attacking piece , the number of defenders must also be increased , and their values taken into account .
in bali island , indonesia , the commitment of the people is to this motto which encompasses the spiritual values and cultural heritage of their ancestors .
=half-closed eyes.= -- the most common way is to half close the eyes , which shuts out details , but permits you to see the values .
this is done by simply taking the min of the two values at both ends prior to doing any computations .
merchandise of all sorts and of all values is spread on the bare ground .
the song expresses country pride , southern values , and remembering good times from the past .
bertolucci has developed a criteria of goal-setting for her clients and readers that involves ranking values and prioritizing those most important , called the personal happiness prescription .
many conservatives and newspapers accused rahbari of promoting western values .
ordinarily , fluctations in quoted values are of no great importance to the private investor , so that the absence of quotation which mortgages enjoy is not especially valuable .
commerce rejoices in , and progresses by , a common measure of values .
since digital signals take on one of only two different values , a disturbance would have to be about one-half the magnitude of the digital signal to cause an error ; this property of digital circuits can be exploited to make signal processing noise-resistant .
the woman had evidently intended to reserve such values as she had discovered for the benefit of her own , her husband and his father .
we internalize many of these values so that it becomes difficult to see who we really are and what we really want from life and from our efforts .
it is not to be forgotten , even in this general and brief view of the values of the british fleet , that it has , within these few years , assumed a new character as an instrument of war .
st petersburg , again , is connected with greenwich by european systems of triangulation ; and the greenwich meridian is adopted by russia as the zero for all her longitude values .
it gives rise to some thinking on communication , private life , freedom of expression , the values we are attached to and those we are ready to get rid of , and it is this effect which makes it such a powerful , important medium . ''
this stamp was of similar size to the other values of the set then current ( excepting the 20c and 50c , of course ) and it was printed from steel plates in sheets of 200 arranged in ten horizontal rows of twenty stamps each .
instead , the energy of such a macroscopic system appears to vary over a continuum of values .
the function of economic values is the motivation of the economic activities of society .
the basic concept was to encourage post-1960s gender neutrality , saluting values such as individuality , tolerance , and comfort with one 's identity .
mccarthyist pressures lead the rockefeller foundation to withdraw its financial support , lest it be labeled " communist " for backing the subversion of traditional american values .
denoting by [ xi ] the abscissa of this curve which corresponds to area u , we find the value of [ xi ] corresponding to each of the given values of u .
the ke kama pono program embeds native hawaiian values throughout its activities , functions , and mentorships .
specifying the regression coefficients with a negative sign implies that high values of the covariates increase the survival time , but this is merely a sign convention ; without a negative sign , they increase the hazard .
[ 154 ] his interest is primarily in moral social values , and he attempts no detailed treatment of economic social values , seeming to hold that the austrian treatment of objective value is adequate .
different decision makers have different sets of values and preferences , and for this reason , decision analysis cannot yield a universally preferred solution .
it matters nothing that the values the myth was designed to express may remain standing without it , or may be transferred to its successor .
this idea was elaborated , in 1805 , by _nœrdlinger_ and _hossfeld_ into the modern conception of expectancy values , and the now familiar discount calculations were inaugurated by them .
between the mobility of his star groups , and the values derived from them for the angular movement of the sun , the conformity proved so close as materially to strengthen the inference that apparent movement measures real distance .
apart from the additional values created by increased population , it meant a quantity of labor which , in turn , would precipitate wages to the lowest possible scale .
all human values were reduced to a single value -- that is to say , to firmness of christian faith and to service of the church .
a common property of computer programs is locality of reference , which refers to accessing the same values repeatedly and holding frequently used values in registers to improve performance ; this is what makes fast registers and caches meaningful .
in other words , the values of foreign commodities depend on the terms of international exchange .
a rate and a tax upon site values the committee of 1913 were obliged to turn their attention to other suggestions .
dms values and vice versa .
the fill factor is directly affected by the values of the cell 's series and shunt resistances .
respecting neither traditional rural values nor a positive ethic of urbanism , systematization is considered by some observers to be a major contributing factor to the uncommonly violent fall of the ceaușescu regime during the revolution of 1989 .
items can be typed or untyped and include atomic values as well as xml nodes ( with elements , attributes and text nodes , etc .
this would include values , goals and programs of schools , as well as systems of accountability and educational governance .
if the individual values are known , but the first answer is wrong , a second trial may be given .
for observe , that attempt to escape payment for the purest values , no less than for the grossest , _is_ dishonest .
he will value it as he values his life , because that is what it is . ''
the resolution of floating point samples is less straightforward than integer samples , but the benefit comes in the increased accuracy of low values .
this is not an expression of an ideal , as the values of literacy marked art to be , but of alternatives delivered together with the uncertainty that characterizes the new artistic experience as one of obsession with recognition in an environment of competition that often becomes adversarial .
he repeated gently , his voice vibrant in its rise and fall , its giving of delicate values .
there can never be high or low objective values of commodities as a whole .
if you let the x values represent the time of observation , and y values denote the values observed , then it fits a line through the values and you can use this to estimate y values at future times .
for representing a multivariate polynomial that takes only non-negative values over the reals as a sum of squares of rational functions , see hilbert 's seventeenth problem .
any one subject will naturally have all three values , but no two subjects will have the same values mixed in the same proportion .
self-measurement a scale of human values ; with directions for personal application by william de witt hyde he reduces life to its fundamental relations showing the degrees in which each may be fulfilled or nonfulfilled .
but one naturally values them less on account of their great number .
computationvaluesthe size of chaining values equals to the size of computation values usually .
this disproportionate growth in the number of the city dwellers will if continued make certain what is in any case extremely probable , a steady and considerable advance in urban land values and rents .
he who acknowledges , and wishes to further , human values can not be said to be irreligious or unspiritual .
the tumbling of values in his securities carried down the whole market from five to six points in a single day .
more than once had i seen the values of all city property , improved and unimproved , apparently disappear ; -- lots without purchasers , and houses without tenants , the community so poor and panic-stricken that real estate became the merest drug .
low values in mushrooms for vitamin d below indicate incidental exposure to sunlight which activates synthesis of vitamin d2 .
the talk assuredly became abstruse , but it dealt in literary values solely as related to public taste in the novel of commerce , and to the devices of layton & company for divining and stimulating that variable quantity .
inventing right and wrong , bluntly begins with the opening sentence " there are no objective values " .
he was the first astronomer who determined reliable values for the distance from the sun to another star by the method of parallax .
janele hyer-spencer began her career as an activist , advocate , lawyer and politician on the foundation of devotion to family and the values of hard work .
both the sub-man and the serious man refuse to recognize that they are free , in the sense of being able to choose their own values .
she felt i had a sense of true values in people , and that the simplicity and sureness with which i had met this situation was the essence of good breeding .
real estate values naturally deteriorated in sumner , and john weber later sold seventy-five of his lots for $ 15 and allowed the greater part of his initial kansas investment to be sold for taxes , inasmuch as the property had no real value .
a lot of the values are manually calculated assuming sphericity .
but he must work under an effective incentive : he must be prompted by some duty imposed by tribal standards , or he must be lured by ambitions and values also dictated by custom and tradition .
the slot-concept is called roles and the values of the roles are role-fillers .
c the only byte-sized data type is the char , so these are sometimes used to hold numeric values .
his father hires kong ho-san ( yasuaki kurata ) , a tutor from japan , to teach his son academics and moral values .
a 2006 study concluded that a test group of rats fed with acetic acid ( the main component of vinegar ) had " significantly lower values for serum total cholesterol and triacylglycerol " and other health benefits .
also , implied [ [ type conversion ] ] s that result in incompatible values being treated as identical against the programmer 's intent can lead to security issues .
as for the law , we have seen how it adds to the confusion of moral values .
kings and generals are endowed with motives appropriate to what the historian values in their actions ; plans are imputed to them prophetic of their actual achievements , while the thoughts that really preoccupied them remain buried in absolute oblivion .
the national courtesy campaign was not actually the second of its kind to instill values of courtesy to singaporeans , though they were not conducted on as big a scale as the national courtesy campaign over such a long period .
an opposing interpretation , represented by pothier and mocquereau , supported a free rhythm of equal note values , although some notes are lengthened for textual emphasis or musical effect .
and overlook not the difference between real and fictitious values .
one of the values of disinterested science that is of considerable psychological importance is the change in attitude it brings about in man 's realization of his place in the universe .
the gaac was made up of business owners who advocated the reduction of recreational drug use , local crime , and the improvement of the neighborhood , in an effort to restore property values .
american , english and french banks refusing to buy pesetas except at gold par would end the false values put arbitrarily on pesetas as far as exchange is concerned on the loan of pesetas .
in the same way the values of two different objects may be equilibrated ; by employing close lines slightly bitten in the one case , and spaced lines more deeply bitten in the other .
“ then he made me the proposition that there be no regular rates established , but to ship to the smelter for one month and then bring my returns and he would take out what he might think a recompense for pulling these values over the road .
my old values had been shattered and so far i have been unable to replace them .
of course , what those religious and nationalistic values are vary from nation to nation and time to time .
such engraving is exceptional , of course ; but the evenness and transition of tone , the care for line , the discrimination of both line and color values , shown in these butterflies ( fig .
these three values represent industry averages for the position .
the latitude in the composition resulting from this replacement is evinced in the considerable range that has been observed in the physical characters , but the crystalline symmetry persists unaltered ; the lower values correspond to the stones that are usually met with as gems .
reinforcing and validating the values of _goods_ are the social values of _men_ .
better known , perhaps , is the story of a large silver inkstand which queen alexandra particularly values , though it does not belong to her , but to the king .
such a self-subsistent life must be operative in the foundation of our nature , but it must constantly receive its material from the most [ p.243 ] important meanings and values of the world .
farms and farm houses are purchased and literally carted away , neither land nor houses representing values worth considering when compared with the stratum of ore beneath them .
2 ) if he values the goodwill of the town itself , he shall pay us thirty shillings as compensation , if the king will grant us -this concession . ''
this feminist ethical analysis derives its values from the action of a female biblical heroine .
in applications of statistics such as epidemiology , sociology and finance , the quartiles of a ranked set of data values are the four subsets whose boundaries are the three quartile points .
if you use that script , give the preview a quick scan for doi values .
in a series of papers in the 1990s the survey showed that while type ia supernovae do not all reach the same peak luminosity , a single parameter measured from the light curve can be used to correct unreddened type ia supernovae to standard candle values .
at the same time , vernacular literatures ranging from provençal to icelandic embodied in lyric and romance the values and worldview of an increasingly self-conscious and prosperous courtly aristocracy .
aim of subject _x_ in the college curriculum : is it taught for disciplinary values ?
`` norwich river at evening '' is not only a charming picture , but shows , in its perspective and its values , the hand of a skilful artist .
all elements essential to his business present themselves in the guise of exchange values .
values scales were first developed by an international group of psychologists whose goal was to create a unique self-report instrument that measured intrinsic and extrinsic values for use in the lab and in the clinic .
it entices minds of all orders , and they are happy to dwell in it , for the nonce realizing in the perception of the system the values it utters .
the whole problem is one of the incidence of taxation and the question of land values , and various applications of the principle of betterment have been tried in america and in england , raising considerable controversy from time to time .
=chance for own clothes at no cost.= striking big outfit of over 100 large swatches furnished free -- other equally remarkable values at $ 30 and $ 35 .
when a solid body is in contact with two fluids , the surface of the solid can not alter its form , but the angle at which the surface of contact of the two fluids meets the surface of the solid depends on the values of the three surface-tensions .
it is during these formative years that children embrace and develop the core values , or skills for life , they will need throughout their teen and adult years .
any attempt to provide our people an atmosphere conducive to healthy debate and deliberation , will have to begin with an amendment of this act , which strikes at the very root of our democratic values .
consider an arbitrary function f with arguments in a and values in b .
it seemed to him that he had come into a world of new standards , new values .
a real inner product space is defined in the same way , except that h is a real vector space and the inner product takes real values .
the chief circumstances in its favor are low land values , lesser fire risk , cheapness and certainty of reproduction and excellent market prospects .
frosties also did a twelve monster series of monster sports stars in my pocket , including " tony the referee " , which were made of much harder plastic and had no point values .
lasser allowed the letter column to become a free discussion of ideas and values , and published stories dealing with topics such as the relationship between the sexes .
the values are in _kroner_ ( one _krone_ is practically the equivalent of twenty-seven cents in united states money ) .
( it is significant , in studying relative news values , that this story , dealing with property loss , gets only half as much space as that telling of a woman ’ s death .
if so , such constancy would be an echo mainly of the long-dignified state of wedded constancy ; and the greatest of all tributes to the values of this .
i tried to create two lists and put them in the hash as keys ' values .
rather than envy them regretfully , he preferred to despise their values of life , but on that very account he had to oppose these values with better ones .
weltbild informed the publishing house that they were owned by the diocese of the catholic church of germany and the book titles carried by icon empire press did not meet the standards of traditional values .
the whole meaning of life , together with all the graduated and accepted values of it , becomes for ever changed in the light of the knowledge of celestial happiness .
in 2003 , and with a free lithuania , juan ignacio fourment kalvelis , a young journalist and member of the lithuanian community in argentina , following the steps and values of zeferinas junkevicius , decided to re-open " echoes of lithuania " .
the radioactivity determined as the mean of the values for these two classes of rock closely agrees with that found for intermediate rocks , or rocks containing an intermediate amount of silica .
always enwrapped in the illusory mists , always touching the evasive clouds , the peaks of the great smoky mountains are like some barren ideal , that has bartered for the vague isolations of a higher atmosphere the material values of the warm world below .
r values of thermal insulation would not simply add like ohms of electrical resistance .
but though , since then , values have varied , a bagatelle of ten millions is deep enough for any girl , sufficiently deep at least for its depths to hold strange things .
fuzzy sets generalize classical sets , since the indicator functions of classical sets are special cases of the membership functions of fuzzy sets , if the latter only take values 0 or 1 .
teaching for social justice is a philosophy of education centered on the promotion of social justice , and the instillation of such values in students .
sayeed was given the 97th ramon magsaysay award in journalism , literature , and creative communication arts for " cultivating in the youth of bangladesh a love for literature and its humanizing values through exposure to the great books of bengal and the world " .
the compensation adjustment capacitor only allows for compensation over a small range of oscilloscope input capacitance values .
naturalism is any of several philosophical stances , typically those descended from materialism and pragmatism , that do not distinguish the supernatural ( including strange entities like non-natural values , and universals as they are commonly conceived ) from nature .
literary agents , working for libraries but sharing the values of the learned community , demonstrate this professionalization on the most fundamental level .
on a charting program , a line is marked for the high and low values visually demonstrating the channel on the markets price ( or other ) values .
opposition party movement for democratic change says they have no connection to zvakwana , but share its values and support its efforts .
in berman 's interpretation , observers relying on modern liberal values have sometimes found it difficult to identify the anti-liberal and anti-rational quality of totalitarian movements .
mccoy invented a trade-value draft chart that assigned values to each draft pick and a numeric total for each deal .
mr collier 's book , however , is merely serviceable as a guide to the character of the works described ; he does not offer an opinion on the selling values , nor does he always render the titles correctly .
a central concept of his work states that too many people concentrate their career goals on extrinsic rewards such as high salary and prestige and unnecessarily sacrifice intrinsic values such as job satisfaction .
the study of antiscorbutic values points a lesson in regard to the methods of cooking vegetables .
parables tv focuses on providing faith-based entertainment and offers content with christian values .
some iteration is generally required due to the need to calculate interdependent values .
this is why no change in the curriculum can do much for education , as long as the pupils imbibe no respect for intellectual values at home , and find none among their school-fellows .
when the questions were first raised there were neither great values nor large numbers in existence .
we can not measure the empty spaces of absolute value , but can only express values in terms of visible goods , the general average of which is the nearest approach to absolute invariability we can , in practice , reach .
the show extolled the values of hillbilly brand flour , the ten commandments and the bible .
_value-difference._ light , middle , and dark values ( without change of hue ) .
one could see this stylistic changes in this album 's predecessor join the army , but this album had a distinctly more defined metal sound ; more complex and lengthy songs , as well as better production values .
we can not assign mathematical values to spiritual effects and tabulate them like board of trade returns ; but real spiritual movements will before long have practical issues , that can be heard , and seen , and felt , and even admit of being put into tables .
both silappatikaram and terukkuttu are centered around the chastity and moral power of women as cherished values .
stop out all these , and do not lose sight of the values of the original ( pl .
the presented table in page 1999 shows the re-calculated values by arnold j .
but neither the social estimate nor the ordinances of lawmakers were authorised to determine values and prices arbitrarily .
consequently a system based on binary-coded decimal representations of decimal fractions avoids errors representing and calculating such values .
the philosophy of short selling is simple ; it really amounts to betting that values will decline .
the precise numerical results depend , of course , on the particular values chosen for key parameters , such as the development threshold and the responsibility start date .
the principle of popular education had no application to a class which was not of the people , a class which the common sentiment of a christian nation had placed at the zero point of political values , and meant to keep forever at that point .
together with elon kohlberg , he applied operator techniques to study convergence properties of the discounted and finite stage values .
these exaggerations , these falsifications of the perspective of things , break the harmony of our life at every step ; we lose the true standard of values and are distracted by the false claims of the varied interests of life contending with one another .
[ 39 ] footnote 39 : see the chapter on `` values of foods , '' pp .
in considering extension of values in depth , it demands the most rigorous investigation .
europeanization program as epitomized by the rokumeikan , rejecting the current trend toward blind adulation of all things western , and rejection of japanese history and japanese moral values .
mackinnon an enemy of university 's values " editorial by justin shubow , michigan daily , november 25 , 2002 .
these correspond to the " false " ( " 0 " ) , and " true " ( " 1 " ) , values of the boolean domain , respectively , yielding binary code .
other common assertions about the benefits of trial by jury is that it provides a means of interjecting community norms and values into judicial proceedings and that it legitimizes the law by providing opportunities for citizens to validate criminal statutes in their application to specific trials .
`` i suppose , '' she added stiffly , `` it is a question of values . ''
human values are instructions whose purpose is that of keeping alive the unresolvable , creative conflicts of the strange walker .
well , of course , it was no such simple question , and never could be while life held so many values more splendid than any wilfulness could win .
he also argues that the very capitalist system the economic conservatives strive to strengthen and deregulate promotes and commercially markets the perceived assault on traditional values .
when a multivalued description was to be displayed , one of the values was randomly chosen .
it was between such values that his election took its shape .
man , alive ! -- this is n't a boom , it is the natural growth to real values .
a crusoe does not need to measure values for purposes of exchange , but he has other reasons for measuring them .
basically , the rmsd represents the sample standard deviation of the differences between predicted values and observed values .
those in parentheses are what they might be , based on the discrepancy between observed values for _a .
it retained the 30 aeons , but called them " greatnesses " and gave them numerical values .
feel free to have many sections of debug-display added into a lua module , or add several parameter validation tests as extra if-statements to check the values of variables to detect typical bad data .
besides functioning as a means of worship , nurul huda mosque serves as a means to instill the values of islam to the campus community , especially muslim students .
it aims to provide values based , high quality education and it has succeeded in quite a measure .
he believed in their not going down , thought it perfectly possible and eminently desirable ; but held it was much better for society that the divisions , the categories , the differing values , should be kept clear .
when evidence of secondary sulphide enrichment was first recognized there was a tendency to magnify its effectiveness , and to assume that in most cases the values were due to this process ; that the primary zones would be found to be valueless .
wiesner-hanks also goes on to mention that protestants also wanted to teach " proper religious values .
islam , but rather due to the arab culture , which predated islam ( although some of the arab values are enshrined in islam , since the religion originated there ) .
the overall range of the δh values for these compounds was only 0 .
we can therefore for each spectral type compute the mean values and the dispersion of these attributes .
not only is this true of the average american family , but their lack of knowledge of the fundamentals of cooking and food values brings about a waste largely responsible for what is called the `` high cost of living . ''
already the old order had changed ; the values were different , and even as i had once suspected , a few months had sufficed to do that .
here , hex1 , hex2 , and hex3 are hexadecimal color values .
universities in india will assist in the rediscovery of spiritual values which the world needs at the present time .
you are deflecting scrutiny of your values and actions , which is unethical .
gafolder makes torsion angles moves within the ranges defined by the values and uncertainties of torsion angles predicted by preditor .
parallel assignment ( though not multiple return values ) predates clu , appearing in cpl ( 1963 ) , under the name simultaneous assignment , but clu popularized it and is often credited as the direct influence leading to parallel assignment in later languages .
islamic precepts , religious creeds , ethical and human values .
because they are no longer in production most of the masters series command strong resale values ; examples in nos ( new old stock ) condition command a premium .
the statistical tables for t and for z provide critical values for both one- and two-tailed tests .
this request for comment ( rfc ) was created in 1999 as a methodology to benchmark network devices such as hubs , switches and routers as well as to provide accurate and comparable values for comparison and benchmarking .
such an achievement demands a determined quest for appropriate values , a quest that will test profoundly both the spiritual and scientific resources of humankind .
we will mail , free , upon application , `` the natural method , '' an interesting booklet on the importance of normal elimination and a study of the comparative values of the better known cathartics .
since yellow and eosin lie at the left end of the first chromosome , the high values , namely , 43 and 42 , agree in making it very probable that sable lies near the other end ( _i .
each zero has a basin of attraction in the complex plane , the set of all starting values that cause the method to converge to that particular zero .
name some of the 'illusions ' that hide values from us at the present time .
suppose i wanted to make a website about for example collective intelligence , where people made predictions about eg the future values of various stocks and shares , these predictions were averaged , and then later in time compared to the reality .
if approximate values of factorial numbers are desired , stirling 's approximation gives good results using floating-point arithmetic .
but i believe that a true-hearted woman always values impulses , because she is never at a loss to understand them .
_the transvaluation of all values , _ this is my formula for mankind's greatest step towards coming to its senses -- a step which in me became flesh and genius .
the contractual ability to sell in this way meant keeping the fleet young with a policy or replacing planes whenever residual values happened to exceed the costs of leasing new replacements , such as capacity temporarily leased in from other operators .
we should not impose moral values on others .
contracts and quasi-contracts are based upon the giving and receiving of equivalent values , _do ut des_ , whereas mutual insurance is a kind of substitute for direct liability .
`` go , '' said the image , `` thou hast won the sword ; 97 he who thus values honour more than fame makes fame itself his servant , not his lord ; and the man 's heart achieves the hero 's claim .
also , it appears that , at those speeds at which compression shows its highest values , the initial pressure at the start of the compression stroke is from .5 to .9 lb .
copy column d and then paste with values .
another example is censoring of values above y _ u .
academy were animated one way or the other with values , ideals and better norms of life inculcated when they were once with the institution .
objections were raised , as follows : ( _a_ ) land values represent no original investment by the company , do not indicate land especially appropriate for the manufacture of gas , and increase the apparent assets without increasing the earning power .
god , but they hold a core set of spiritual values that inform their actions .
this pride _must_ be brought low , this system of values _must_ lose its values : is that attained ?
simultaneously the gallery strives to promote and diffuse new artistic values as well as the historical vanguards that have influenced those .
but in practice one is limited in the selection of these values and besides these , there are other limiting causes .
high production values , right marketing were the key of his success .
elizabeth offered her sister-in-law no courtesy ; she barely bowed in response to her greeting , and there was a final very severe struggle as to values .
`` you have the courage that a veteran general most values in a soldier .
noise margins are generally defined so that positive values ensure proper operation , and negative margins result in compromised operation , or perhaps outright failure .
lastly , contradictions among technique , values , styles , methods , and so on are important to postmodernism and are many cases irreconcilable .
the true values of the higher life can not be safely protected by that thoughtless idealism which draws its life from vagueness and which therefore has to be afraid of every new discovery in scientific psychology .
men living in a natural existence imagine values and ideals which can never be realized there .
toruń city county generates by far the highest number of new dwellings built each year among all kuyavian-pomeranian counties , both relative to its population as well as in absolute values .
these two values are not always the same ; they are sometimes greatly discrepant ; but even in their discrepancy , they usually preserve intimate relations .
an outline for the analysis of news stories news values 1 .
but before any material progress can be accomplished there must be someone to draw a discriminating line between true and false values .
but other people repeat it , and keep getting values clustered near zero .
furthermore , journalists and researchers have found that the " rg score " , calculated by researchgate via a proprietary algorithm , can reach high values under questionable circumstances .
though he still loves her , he is bothered by their differences in wealth , values and personality .
she was growing every day more lonely and self-absorbed ; she was losing her clear perceptions of the values of life ; she became warped , and prejudiced , and very silent .
in the united states , kbb and nada listings are based on reported resale values from actual transactions .
as well as the lighter , sillier atmosphere , fans also disliked the lower production values of the new edition , in which most of the internal art consisted of extremely cartoonish and sketchy illustrations as opposed to the more detailed and thematically-appropriate jim holloway illustrations of previous editions .
jo ann zaeske told an interviewer that their support for huckabee was based on the candidate 's embrace of " family values .
upon reducing them , however , it was found that some abnormal source of error existed , which resulted in anomalous values of the aberration-constant in the different years , and a negative parallax in all .
the first book of the _transvaluation of all values , the songs of zarathustra , the twilight of the idols , _ my attempt , to philosophise with the hammer -- all these things are the gift of this year , and even of its last quarter .
late in her teens she rejected her family 's values and those of the church .
it can not be denied that they would form an ideal source of current of small values .
we may be assured that such shall be the character of the money in our country if the people will sustain the party which has equalized the values of the paper and metal moneys .
hend al-mansour saudi american artist activist with art commenting on both the cultural and aesthetic values of the arabs .
year 1918 itself , in marco 's words , represents the definitive collapse of " belle epoque " values and a full transition to 20th century .
prices of outputs depend on the prices of the inputs used to produce them , while values of outputs depend on the values of the inputs used to produce them .
as ignatian spirituality has an essential apostolic dimension , members of the clc do reflect also on how to bring gospel values in all aspects of life of the world of today .
the answer is ( to put it in a form intelligible to the questioner ) that christianity increases the wealth of the world by creating new values .
one of them , laura , attempts to exchange a worked vandyke , which she values at two dollars and a half ; eliza , being reproached by the pedler , `` vows that she buys more of pedlers than any other person in the house . ''
in some cultures , it is against the values of the employer to fire a long-serving , hard-working employee , even during an economic downturn ( e .
he was himself an immigrant jew of the type that values education , and sets a great price on the higher development of the child .
the dates are significant in showing the turning of these skillful playwrights to play-making that was more serious in the handling of life and more artistic in constructive values ; they are practically synchronous with the introduction of ibsen into england .
the negation or the revision of historical facts of this type call into question the values which found the fight against racism and anti-semitism and is likely to seriously disturb law and order .
chapter 4 social system and values since the end of world war ii romanian society and its values have been in a state of flux .
but " without inventing a model underlying function to curve-fit the sampled values " makes the problem undefined .
but the ancients were ignorant of these things , and their canvases contained many contradictions : there was a continuous warring between linear composition and colour values .
to determine the proportions of substances or articles of different values or strengths which must be taken to prepare a mixture of any other value or strength.——rule .
the true appreciator still sees in his earlier loves something that is good , and he values the good the more justly that he sees it now in its right relation and apprehends its real significance .
there , adams took monolith , the face of half dome , which mary street alinder called adams 's " most significant photograph " because it was a triumph of visualization showing " extreme manipulation of tonal values " .
before all men , he saw the intellectual values of the moral sentiment .
since then , a first through sixth grade elementary program has continued to flourish and has prospered as a catholic , innovative center of learning embedding gospel values within the curriculum .
the social forces animating the conflict were embedded in localized rural values of stewardship and decentralization .
for example , changing a formula can instantly change the graph , the table of values , and the text read-out for the function represented in all these ways .
haddock ] and to preserve the integrity of his former values " , pointing out that the first thirteen pages are devoted purely to the boy reporter .
it stands up for democratic values and extends the hand of friendship to the cuban people .
the rankings are all the same , with any differences , where they exist , being in the values assigned from the studies from which they are derived .
the new values were the 5d. , 7½d .
the modified mercalli scale expresses the intensity of an earthquake ’ s effects in a given locality in values ranging from i to xii .
thus , we ourselves may have observed how the white gown and face of a woman , seated on the grass , will assume values of reflected green .
this may be termed calibration of the scale , and does not necessarily involve the comparison of the instrument with any independent standard , but merely the verification of the accuracy of the relative values of its indications .
in logic , a three-valued logic ( also trivalent , ternary , trinary logic , or trilean , sometimes abbreviated 3vl ) is any of several many-valued logic systems in which there are three truth values indicating true , false and some indeterminate third value .
finally , osgi bundles can now have their return values read .
both dharmawan and sims worked closely to free the show of heavy-handed gimmicks that had bogged down previous seasons and to dramatically lift production values .
speculation : effect of on land values , 92 , 93 , 103 .
afterwards such near association , affection and ability made mr. keese a veritable stronghold of authentic values concerning this grand-uncle .
when house-decoration was a part of architecture all its values were founded on structural modifications ; consequently it may seem that ideas to be derived from a study of such methods suggest changes too radical for those who are not building , but are merely decorating .
that some people are aware of these food values is evidenced in the nationwide tree balloting now being conducted by the american forestry association for the selection of a national tree .
its only logical development would be an art-machine -- a machine for establishing values correctly , and determining what the eye sees scientifically , thereby making the production of art a mechanical certainty .
in fact , the caloric values of the rations were greatly overestimated , although this was not apparent until many years later .
dual ec drbg , a nist-recommended cryptographic random bit generator , came under criticism in 2007 because constants recommended for use in the algorithm could have been selected in a way that would permit their author to predict future outputs given a sample of past generated values .
backward in the artistic sense , because it tends to a confusion of values .
the idea of displaying the documents strikes some academic critics looking from the point of view of the 1776 or 1789 america as " idolatrous , and also curiously at odds with the values of the revolution .
they are genuinely skeptical of intellectual discriminations which they do not perceive , and æsthetic values which they do not feel .
according to one reviewer , the " real hero " is " his home town and its values " , a " defiantly political " message .
the bukusu are strong believers in their cultural values , practices and traditions .
for the normal distribution , these two values are not perfectly linearly related , but they follow a highly linear relationship over the range of z-values most often observed , from 1 to 5 .
failure to appreciate relative values , the prejudice arising from a debased or immature morality , the bigotry of misunderstood religion and the dread of wounding prudish susceptibilities have led competent writers to devote to pigs and sheep volumes which should have had man for their subject .
he campaigned for the adoption of four specific essential laws to achieve a moral , political and economic break with the totalitarian past which would also underpin the establishment of a just society based on democratic values and respect for individual human rights .
in neither system are values determined by merit or production .
if the table on the left is the set of solutions of a constraint satisfaction problem , its variables b and d are constrained to the values of the table to the right .
the relative values supposed , however , are near enough to illustrate the contention that the type of the maximum volume curve can be explained on this assumption of different adsorption isotherms for each of the ions .
as almost as a form of protest against this religious tradition , they adopted a set of values and customs completely opposite of those preached by the brahmin priests .
these numbers are proven to be prime for the values of q up to 83339 .
but with some modifications so it works better in template code , and so we find low values faster .
the logical location for early lines of roadtown will be at the end of present rapid transit or commuting facilities of our cities or will tap these lines far enough out to avoid high land values .
helicity in itself is not the only component of severe thunderstorms , and these values are to be taken with caution .
this means that the diagonal values of the matrices of the linear maps induced on the simplicial chain complex of x must be all be zero .
guidelines for the selection of these parameters have been suggested , however the final values used are free to be chosen within these guidelines .
by contrast , maleic acid has pka values of approximately 1 .
the cost and calorific values as computed by dr. willard of the state agricultural college of kansas , given below , shows the relative values of various kinds of domestic fuels .
this is a fundamental violation of wikipedia 's values .
it is meant to capture the tense atmosphere of the late 19th century in france , as school teachers felt entrusted with a superior mission to actively promote republican and secular values , among a largely illiterate population still much influenced by the authority of royalist or catholic powers .
in other words , the hero , frustrated by his attempt to find concrete values in the world begins to turn toward the metaphysical , the otherworldly for satisfaction .
johnson put special emphasis on the critical role played by local newspapers , which , he argues , " reflect the values of the residents and businesses , challenge assumptions , and shine a light on our imperfections and aspirations .
hovering over the color box shows the hsv , rgb , and values for the color in the tool tip .
peters , h. , values the average work of a laborer in the building trade , 167 .
there is no such thing as a general rise or a general fall of values .
the film was rejected for distribution and screening in kenya by the kenya film classification board , on the grounds that the film " promotes homosexuality , which is contrary to national norms and values " of kenya .
during the sino-japanese war he published works which supported the new life movement for revitalizing confucian values .
what constitutes a family in an age whose pragmatics is not defined by the values perpetuated in and through literacy ?
faithfully he set about cultivating surface values , but he never could laugh at things that were just amusing ; he never could laugh unless he were moved to laughter .
debate on a second gas pipeline from alberta to california served as a good example of changing values during this period .
and may not popular confidence in a great statesman or financier in times of panic cause fears to be allayed , and values to return to goods that had lost their value ?
there is nothing upon which the prosperity and happiness of a people so much depend as on the integrity of their measure of values .
what he shall tell is determined partly by his judgment of news values and partly by the space limit the editor has set .
it was that passing school of “ booms ” and bellowing that did it all -- the writers of romances for kitchen maids and shop girls , whose measure of book values was by dollars only .
a number of functions are available for rounding scalar numeric values in various ways .
so be very sparing with your tone values when modelling the different parts .
hence we may safely assume that the variation from one column to the next and from one line to the next is linear for values of β .
war annihilates values .
derived from mass values using molar mass of 90 .
it is a question of the worth of the things in which we find our pleasure , and the relative values of the things we suffer for .
anatol is unable to bond with the girl and the solid values of the " small world " he so longs for ; he remains an enigmatic adventurer who is not interested in eventually settling down .
`` yes , indeed -- the point of importance being not to confuse one's values -- material success and spiritual defeat not always being recognized , mr. leitzel , as twin sisters .
vapour pressure values are taken from the international critical tables , and refer to the total vapour pressure of the solution .
=color values in photographs= another thing to remember is that , unless in broad sunlight , green will take dark and sometimes black ; and brown or tan , being of the same color value in the photograph , will mingle with and often be lost in the background .
with careful management and the natural increase of land values , it ought to be made the foundation for a comfortable fortune for its owner . ' ''
in the dual space , it expresses the creation of the economic values associated with the outputs from set input unit prices .
the study of the enormously complicated and varying currency values of those days is in itself the work for a whole lifetime ; but the above figures are _practically_ correct .
all values are rounded in the last decimal place ) .
on the final playing , all prize values were doubled .
the association for the improvement of the condition of the poor , new york city , not only sends bread to fill the hungry stomach , but now sends a wise and sympathetic worker to help women to understand food and money values , which means a permanent help .
the patani united liberation organization ( pulo ) is a movement that was founded on the nationalist and secular values of patani nation-building .
without feeling for the values of sensation , men may be sympathetic and intelligent , but they can not be lovers of the beautiful .
thought : `` one letter to your friend ( the pope ) would be enough ; you would soon see what fruit it bore ; because i know how he values you .
i am trying to ascertain some values from topographic maps from topozone .
h. the values for ‹gaseous› elements refer to the gases under one atmosphere pressure .
14 ) , and authorities have tried to reconcile this divergence by speculating on the different values represented by a talent in different countries and epochs .
can self-delusion be carried so far that black and white exchange values according to the chances of birth and environment ?
it is an attempt to extend objective principles into the realm of social values .
threshold values obtained from staircases can fluctuate wildly , so care must be taken in their design .
`` what publics do , or think , or say , or want -- are merely -- i do n't know -- sort o ' chemical values .
on further comparisons of the two scales there are some points of difference which have a bearing on their values as colour standards .
the nasz dziennik official website informs that the paper aims to examine issues relating to social , cultural , political and religious matters ; and provide information " about which other media are silent " while promoting christian values .
the youngest of two sons of claude and fannie shields , dale and his older brother , gerald were raised in a house full of art , music and spiritual values .
the above values have the property the ratio between any consecutice pair is the 9th root of 2 , i .
and there is a great difference in the values of the various moneys .
the steady-state values are also very slightly dependent on the strain-rate .
the initiative is staffed by accomplished scholars and academics striving to promote dignified jewish freedom of religious expression which is consistent with the values of western democracy .
in many societies , such as in those in europe , languages are considered a significant component of ethnic values .
thus , emergy evaluations generate new emergy unit values .
with foreign invasion , all values become nothing .
the motorola 68000 family , x86 architecture , and other computing platforms have a word size of 16 bits , representing 65536 possible values .
for the advantages which fashion values are plants which thrive in very confined localities , in a few streets namely .
the accord also contained the " canada clause " , which sought to codify the values that define the nature of the canadian character .
in computer science , integer sorting is the algorithmic problem of sorting a collection of data values by numeric keys , each of which is an integer .
note that the parameter and values are case sensitive .
bernal has not gentrified to the extent of its neighbor noe valley , but gentrification and property values are increasing as urban professionals replace working-class home owners and renters .
given that the bards depended on aristocratic support to survive , and that this power and patronage was shifting towards the new english rulers , this thorough condemnation of their moral values may well have contributed to their demise as a caste .
the rights involved were very important , implicating the foundational values of the constitution .
the values given to the coefficient b1 vary considerably , because , as stated above , it varies with the diameter , and also with the nature of the material of the pipe .
the dialects differed also in phonology , for while the northern generally retained the hard or guttural values of _k_ , _g_ , _sc_ , these were in the two other dialects palatalized before front vowels into _ch_ , _j_ and _sh_ .
we should endeavor best efforts in order to root out ideology of terrorism and maintain material values of humanism .
other approaches to the numerical evaluation of the energy expectation values would therefore , in general , limit applications to much smaller systems than those analyzable thanks to the monte carlo approach .
wind chill numbers are always lower than the air temperature for values where the formula is valid .
a french translation appeared in 1770 which incorporated , as an appendix , some material first published in 1760 outlining an objective procedure for determining suitable values for the parameters of the fitted model from a greater number of observations .
the maps should be contoured , for in no other way can the quantitative values be perceived that are essential to good study .
ft. , but it is now fairly certain that these high values are erroneous , and due , not to the wind , but to faulty design of the anemometer .
and it is easy to show that economic values , in particular , are part of that social situation out of which legal values derive their power .
living with values that one does not share " , he wrote in a recent column on france 's burqa ban , " is a price to be paid for living in a pluralist society " .
the total fine amounted to $ 5,200 , and the jars were carefully examined , the gongs weighed and their values assessed .
many appalachian people feared that the birth of a new modernized appalachia would lead to a death of their traditional values and heritage .
selectively overtly expressing concordantly with the purpose , values , and potential of nursing necessitates a looking at , which is a component of `` i-it '' relating , while acting and being .
as a guide to new reviewers , each of these values is assigned a word , ranging from ' awful ' ( 1 .
in acml many clinical features ( splenomegaly , myeloid predominance in the bone marrow with some dysplastic features but without a differentiation block ) and laboratory abnormalities ( myeloid proliferation , low leukocyte alkaline phosphatase values ) suggest the diagnosis of chronic myelogenous leukemia ( cml ) .
the school lists its values as including the belief that everyone is a teacher and everyone is a learner , all cultures should be honored , adults and children learn together , citizenship means making contributions to the community , and changes occur when people work together .
if the lower values are 30.15 inches and 65° , while the upper values are 28.67 inches and 59° , then the formula becomes ( 30.15 - 28.67 ) / ( 30.15 + 28.67 ) × [ 55,761 + ( 2 × 117 ) ] = 1409 feet .
treasury values its gold at 42 .
mischief and wickedness ... . mumby ! ” mr. rymell , suddenly realizing the true values of the situation , released mr. benshaw ’ s hands and knelt up .
and just because philosophy as science does not create the values is there something in the world to do . ''
she wore a great amount of jewellery and a gown of blue velvet , lavishly bespangled and generously embellished with laces of many periods , values and , you could say , nativity .
17 by finding the intersection of the two lines representing the given data , and reading the values of the remaining variables represented by the other two lines passing through this point .
but even he has to conform to an environment where all the romantic values are reversed .
here we require the maximum and minimum values of x² + y² + z² where x²/a² + y²/b² + z²/c² = 1 .
f ) usually with a resistor connected across it ( typically 220 kω to 470 kω , although values as small as 22 kω were sometimes used or the resistor was simply omitted ) .
that way i could read off the values in multiple locations as i was tweeking the adjustment , and make sure they accurately reflect the colours in one of the other photos .
in phonetic writing the symbols have fixed sounds , which are unchanging throughout , and when these values have once been determined , they may be substituted for the characters wherever they occur , and thus words are formed .
suppose the subject to be a tulip panel in three values : 1 .
a location map can be displayed by providing values for latd , longd , and pushpin _ map .
in a table of values of coins current in portuguese india , given in the _annaes maritimos_ of 1844 , each coin is valued both in _reis of goa_ and in _reis of portugal_ , bearing the above ratio .
the ministry of education announced in april 2010 that the suggested curriculum for the coming school year would not include civics , democratic values or jewish-arab coexistence , and focus more on zionist and jewish values .
the distribution is mainly used in the analysis of extreme values and in survival analysis ( also known as duration analysis or event-history modelling ) .
the end of the story represents mann 's changing political views ; he moved from staunch support of the kaiser during his early life to a belief in progressive , democratic values in europe and a desire to rid the continent of fascist influences .
although in most cases this produces adequate results , a correct conversion or the measurement of non-sinusoidal values requires a more complex and costly converter , known as a true rms converter .
`` he 'll come if he values his life , '' said harding drily .
the higher uses and appreciation of wealth which we are wont to call plain living and high thinking , the moral idea of philanthropy , the æsthetic values and hygienic implications of the right kind of simplicity must not be omitted from the educational idea of thrift .
to mourn for one ’ s self is a last sign of vanity ; we ought only to regret that which has real values , and to regret one ’ s self , is to furnish involuntary evidence that one had attached importance to one ’ s self .
marxist economic determinist and collectivist tradition that he rejected , and the other is an " ethical socialism " that he supported , that was based on values of " social justice , the equal worth of each citizen , equality of opportunity , community " .
religion may perhaps be defined as man 's instinctive effort to bring a central aim into his life and so provide himself with an authoritative standard of values .
in particular , the limit is taken as the complex number z approaches z0 , and must have the same value for any sequence of complex values for z that approach z0 on the complex plane .
the player might have to avoid letting blocks with negative point values attached fall while destroying blocks with positive point values attached .
another powerful socializing mechanism by which values are transmitted is religion , which is for many inextricably linked to a cultural identity .
you need no more than to discover what a man values himself for ; then of all things admire that quality , but be sure to be failing in it your self in comparison of the man whom you court .
the attitude of the book is thoroughly positive and constructive toward all the essential values of our civilization .
a class is characterized by a pattern of conditional probabilities that indicate the chance that variables take on certain values .
there is also the cultural onion which has seven layers to it including artifacts , behaviors , feelings , values , beliefs , worldview and ultimate allegiance .
the question is to determine the values of the parameters for which it is possible to fit the circles inside the triangle .
when equilibrium constants are measured at three or more temperatures values of δh0 will be obtained by straight line fitting .
the great trees were all of one green , their near and far columns flattened out with the branches into masses of equal values .
miss baker substitutes sympathy for the characters and deft dealing with ironic values ( see the ends of act ii and act iii ) for complicated plot and dependence on suspense .
his values were not in the least upset .
the verisimilitude of both situation and conversation is complete ; and in the process there is no exhaustion of emotional values .
for deflation , quantities are approximated by real values ( expressed , at present , with 2000 as the reference year ) that are calculated by dividing the current-dollar value of the component by its price index , where the price index uses 2000 as the reference year .
only once in a great while there is a stately poem in it , or its leaves are illuminated with the glories of art , or they enfold a draft for untold values signed by the millionfold millionnaire old mother herself .
such extreme differences , of course , can not be taken into account in the system of valuation adopted , where all that can be done is to take average values , which , when applied to average samples , ought to bring out their value .
other areas where two values is a good choice are the law and mathematics .
[ 126 ] ( it is precisely because intellect is never `` pure , '' because it always has its emotional accompaniment and presuppositions , that we can objectively communicate our values , as urged in chapter viii . )
because family and ancestry are important cultural values in the arab world and islam , arabs and majority of muslims ( e .
the thesis is that during the late 1970s a new upper class arose that represented a fusion between the bourgeois world of capitalist enterprise and the hippie values of the bohemian counterculture .
while the bridgewater bridge is recognised as being limited in its ability to perform the function of the midland highway , it also has important heritage values and is recognised as a landmark in the area .
the group 's close links with portuguese groups were driven by a strong belief in hispanidad and a desire to see a return to the values of la raza , which they felt had been abandoned in spain .
more generally , in the non-oriented case , one can define the hodge star of a -form as a -pseudo differential form ; that is , a differential forms with values in the canonical line bundle .
as values steadily declined and losses rather than profits in business became the rule , the depression and even despair of business men and manufacturers can hardly be exaggerated .
let 's reject the false choice between protecting our people and upholding our values .
wither's emblems , `` that old book and quaint , '' long-desired , when he finds it at last , he values none the less because a child had coloured the plates with his paints .
he can not conceive of happiness as of a private possession , to be secretly enjoyed ; it stands rooted , like justice , in the wise and equal ordinances of the state ; and the only freedom that he values is freedom under the law .
herr duehring might have understood that competition plays an important role in the distribution of surplus values , and , after sufficient thought , might have grasped at least the outlines of the transformation of surplus value into its subordinate forms from the examples given in the first volume .
consensus of opinion has a distorting effect , sometimes , on ideal values .
so there appears a conception of determining the field that shall be quite independent of given values .
that continual absoluteness which consciousness possesses , since in it alone all heaven and earth are at any moment revealed , ought to convince any radical and heart-searching philosopher that all values should be continually integrated and realised there , where all energies are being momently focussed .
radical traditionalism is often allied with branches of paganism that stress a return to old cultural values that predated the existence of the state system .
these values were now related to the eu-9 .
`` i'm hoping it 'll run into higher values when i hit the contact . ''
in `` the ship of death , '' dr. stilgebauer has written a romance which depicts in all its horror the havoc wrought by war upon human relationships and values outside the actual sphere of the battle-field .
typical values range from 2 percent for straight segments to 10 percent for sharp superelevated curves .
`` if all taxes were put on unimproved land values it would be cheaper to live and there would be more work because it would n't pay to keep land out of use .
the measure of the restoration lies in the extent to which we apply social values more noble than mere monetary profit .
the organization espouses many of the same values as its predecessor .
the whole section on the importance of pka values is too listy , and should be converted to prose .
in practice , the separation distance of the mirrors l is usually much greater than the wavelength of light λ , so the relevant values of q are large ( around 105 to 106 ) .
lay the straight-edge on the given values of _q_ = 3 and _s_ = .002 .
critics of cultural imperialism commonly claim that non-western cultures , particularly from the third world , will forsake their traditional values and lose their cultural identities when they are solely exposed to western media .
these ten values are then set off into a third machine , the tide-predicter proper .
as with other systems of units , the base units of a set of natural units will include definitions and values for length , mass , time , temperature , and electric charge ( in lieu of electric current ) .
his judgment concerning land values was keen and far-sighted .
as you can see , the values tend to expand indefinitely on the zero crossings of the 3rd harmonic , and the overall shape is not smooth but it is stable .
it must raise its voice when these values are threatened or attacked in public life .
it appears therefore equitable that capital should become contributable to the cost of the war which will eventually result in so largely enhancing its invested values .
the latter is an efficient secured finance method to pay for aircraft , whereby these aircraft are sold to related or external lessors from whom they are then leased back , with the airline retaining a substantial interest in the aircraft 's residual values .
nothing on earth of wealth , applause , or mundane wisdom can equal , in the least measure , the temporal and eternal values of a real home .
in order therefore that we might compare the values given to land in the various counties , we have taken at hazard a number of small estates in order that we might by addition and division obtain the value of a typical teamland with typical appurtenances .
at one stage we depend on religious values , the curse and the benediction of the church , as a tremendously vital power in social control ; now we find other modes of social energy frequently more efficacious .
for more than two years the government has been conducting a series of experiments in a very thorough manner , endeavoring to ascertain the gas values of the great lignite coal fields between boulder and denver .
one of the great values of wikipedia is its ability to be on the cutting edge of events as they happen and to adapt quickly to emerging cultural developments .
having such representatives , we can map all of them to 0 ; the rest of f values are deducted unambiguously .
furthermore , it will find all distinct values for ship date .
to afford such numerical constants as determine industrial values .
but that was an age of different values .
most reconstructions posit a large number of vowels to distinguish the many qieyun rhyme classes that occur with some codas , but the number and the values assigned vary widely .
anderson responded that celestiial " is romanticized paganism with very real pagan values behind it .
for calculations of latitude and longitude , tables of the logarithmic values of [ rho ] sin 1 '' , n sin 1 '' , and 2 n [ rho ] sin 1 '' are necessary .
on the other hand _p_ and _q_ may , at a given instant take all possible values , independent of each other .
she had a keen appreciation for genuine values , but none whatever for factitious ones .
i want the calculator to add up the values and tell me what the percentage of each value is compared to the total value .
but a stronger power groweth out of your values , and a new surpassing : by it breaketh egg and egg-shell .
with it a general depreciation of all values seems to be preparing : '' all is without sense . ''
for example , as the radius of curvature increases along a meridian , the corresponding change of latitude implies different values of the coriolis parameter and , in turn , force .
i_ ( _the horizontal scale is twice the vertical scale_ ) ] the infinite values of dy/dx arise from zero values of the quadratic , 1 + 2κt + 3λt^2 .
he appeared to himself as a man who moved easily in very good society , and knew enough about the true values of life to be himself above it .
some variation in values is not uncommon between various studies .
natural laws are rooted in core values shared by many cultures .
table 4.—comparison of country land values .
the values of the gradational differences , of course , depended upon whether equivalents or atomic weights were employed ; but the immediate point is that , whichever basis was adopted , definite numerical relations were to be perceived .
yod ( , i with a semitistic aleph instead of the dot , both yod and alef being considered possible sound values in the 19th century ) .
the class also enjoys a wide variety of spells which cause status ailments of blindness , sleep , poison , frozen in place , or curses which reduce armor values .
even military discipline , which represents the extreme in its demand for slavish mass action , greatly values individual independence .
now different people put very various values on freedom and on oats .
i know this goes against the modern mindset , which values the opinions of radio talk show hosts over the opinions of professional climatologists and scientists and economists , but i hope and pray that the culture of wikipedia has not yet traveled down that road of madness .
the solution of the normal equations gives the most probable values of the unknown quantities. < /cd > -- < col > normal group < /col > < fld > ( geol .
now bit shift all register values to the right ( m1 moves to m0 , m0 moves to m-1 ) and wait for the next input bit .
and indeed its justification ( if we may be so brief on so great a subject ) is that what is false in the science of facts may be true in the science of values .
the writings of gu zhun ( 1915-1974 ) were rediscovered , providing evidence of a stubborn core of liberal values that the communist movement had failed to extinguish .
the silent rise of the wellspring of purity and peace he neither heeds nor values ; for nothing less than the eddies and sallies of religious passion can assure him that he is , `` born from above . ''
because binding energy values are more readily applied and understood , the kinetic energy values , which are source dependent , are converted into binding energy values , which are source independent .
but of course the true calculation is that 20 mon represented 240 days ' rations of rice in the wado schedule of values .
there is very little action in “ release ” of a physical kind , but the spiritual values are dynamic , and the story is told with a processional dignity attained in other stories only by this author .
jewish camp environment where jewish values and activities are emphasized in a fun and stimulating atmosphere .
the calculation of which to do depends on the values of the stuff above ( and the political clout of the people who own it ) vs the character of the geology ( some places , and some layers , are more practical to bore through than others ) .
these values are probably best chosen for each individual application .
the germans included many quite distinct subgroups with differing religious and cultural values .
i 've drawn my graphs right , the maximum value attained is must be less than or equal to ( less than in this case ) the sum of the maximum values of each fn , i .
it is not a conflict simply between two values , both of which the same man may `` participate '' in .
the production values were cavernous and echoey ; a fascinating sound , but very cold and detached " .
his values were uncertain ; and he had none of the sureness of method which men with half his talent had got out of study under a man like , say , carolus duran .
what is true of the land values created by the grocery business applies to the values which are due to other economic institutions and relations , as well as to those values which arise out of the purely `` social '' activities and advantages .
this template makes a table line with two values that are not dependent on the length of month .
i hold , therefore , that should the exiles make such an attempt , it is the duty of every man who values liberty of conscience to rally round them .
the height of his spirits overlooks all casualties , and his boldness proceeds neither from ignorance nor senselessness ; but first he values evils , and then despises them .
it will only be when we have succeeded in getting beyond what plato called the bird-cage theory of knowledge to a sound theory of knowledge and to a solid basis for spiritual values that we shall be able to discuss intelligently the “ findings ” of the mystic .
some give values to different-sized animals of the same species , or different values to the same species in different regions .
at the same time " bezalel " art continued to honor the values of classicism , jugendstil ( art nouveau ) , and eastern european realism .
he is claiming no privilege at all ; he is but exercising the common rights of all students like himself , when he points out that differences in religious values are just as real and just as fundamental as the historic or chronological order itself .
in nearly every class there are some of these men who do not see clearly , and who persist , throughout their whole course , in placing false values upon trivialities .
levinson writes about the foundations of liberalism and asserts that the political liberalism of john rawls is untenable for its lack of interest in values of autonomy .
the low values were identical for each state , except for the state name , state crest and ruler , or state crest only for those states without a ruler .
the moral philosopher must not shirk the duty of showing how the conscience acquires its concepts of moral values , with what weapons it provides reason to combat instinct , which demands satisfaction without paying any attention to the warnings of conscience .
the meanings and values and connections of things die away .
for the constants a , l , p ganguillet and kutter obtain the values 23 , 1 and 0.00155 for metrical measures , or 41.6 , 1.811 and 0.00281 for english feet .
out of the total wsa area of , a total of was recommended to be included as part of the national wilderness preservation system because it provides exceptional wilderness values .
she and her government believe the current law on sexual practices sufficiently addresses the concerns of the majority of liberians and guarantees respect for traditional values .
the fluctuation of prime prices , therefore , measures the rise and fall of slave values in general .
this entails that learners and instructors should develop an awareness of each other 's viewpoints and then look to their own beliefs , standards and values , thus being both subjective and objective at the same time ( savery 1994 ) .
his teaching and research interests are in the fields of values , american society , social capital , social networks and economic sociology .
but there is a unity about nature 's tone arrangements that it is very difficult to improve upon ; and it is usually advisable , if you can , to base the scheme of tone in your picture on a good study of values from nature .
moral and aesthetic values , 23 _et seq._ the authority of morals over aesthetics , 218 _et seq._ morality and utility jealous of art , 216 , 217 .
send to the experiment station in your state and ask for the last bulletin on fertilizer values .
a society can also consist of like-minded people governed by their own norms and values within a dominant , larger society .
it is commonly supposed that she dresses to please others , but she often values fine raiment principally because it shows how much her husband thinks of her .
the circumstance that these remarkable increases in land values are a comparatively recent phenomenon has prevented them from receiving the attention that they deserve , either from the general public or from the students of economic and social problems .
i would be interested in the values ( to rough orders of magnitude ) of these things , if you could kind of demonstrate it for me .
a significant challenge of csv resides in accounting for ecological values and costs that are generated within the realm of agricultural production .
differences in various implementations include where parameters , return values and return addresses are placed , and how the tasks of preparing for a function call and cleaning up the environment afterward are divided between the caller and the callee .
this demand means that the neglected human values shall be restored into the idea of what is just .
i now have a working implementation using those floating-point random values .
thus the good and the beautiful are not values confined to single individuals ; every man striving after them , only contributes towards the sum of common endeavour , and what he wins for himself is at the same time a gain for all .
for every-day use , the equality ( or near-equality ) of the values for macaulay and modified duration can be a useful aid to intuition .
her charming face had attuned its expression so perfectly to the dramatic values of the moment that she appeared , in the words of that sentimental soul , miss priscilla , to be listening already to `` the voice that breathed o'er eden . ''
for such very small values , it is better to use the option .
a biologico-economic mode of thought is evolved which revolutionises all previous estimations of values .
huế also has been known as a place that promotes the traditions of patriotism , industriousness , and respect for the time-honored values of teacher-student relationships .
it is , in fact , an apt illustration of goya ’ s own paradox , that color does not exist , that everything is light and shade of varying values .
gregor continued to define himself as committed to a specific form of the values and convictions of democratic liberalism , consistently arguing that the american brand of democracy has proven the most effective system of government and the most likely to endure .
as the relationship endures ones own needs and values become apparent .
finally a match exists between the calculated values and the experimental photoelectron values for the energy required to remove the first 4 valence electrons .
in total , the expected number of values that follow the differential characteristic is 264 .
to preserve and strengthen positive african cultural values and in general to contribute to the promotion of the moral well-being of society .
this is a morally corrupt action to have taken and it compromises the core values for which wikipedia was originally created in the first place .
no spiritual values enter into the bargain .
mr. hébert is considered one of the best informed men as to realty values here and his advice and judgment are often sought by large investors and he has in many ways been instrumental in promoting the growth and furthering the welfare of his city .
conservation biologists advocate for reasoned and sensible management of natural resources and do so with a disclosed combination of science , reason , logic , and values in their conservation management plans .
in lady loadstone 's household , conditions are upside down ( at least in the playwright 's system of values ) .
popular choices for normalisation constants are the goal target value of the corresponding objective ( hence turning all deviations into percentages ) or the range of the corresponding objective ( between the best and the worst possible values , hence mapping all deviations onto a zero-one range ) .
we know only too well war 's dreadful toll , particularly on racial values .
the algorithm generates a stream of values which are combined with the message to encrypt and decrypt it .
and this is the one essential thing to the collector—at least the true collector who values his labor as something that can not be measured by money .
the solution of simultaneous equations is easily seen to be the values of x , y corresponding to the intersections of the loci .
how a query is evaluated can also depend on statistics gathered about the tables , for instance how many records there are in each table and whether a field has only a few values or mostly unique values .
the next four variations all employ the original melody unadorned , accompanied by passages in shorter note values , sometimes engaging in imitative counterpoint .
most of the three-phase machines have winding factor values between 0 .
words , like all other manifestations of an evolving race , are stamped with the values that have long been paramount in that race .
victor schnirelmann , a cultural anthropologist at the institute of ethnology and anthropology in moscow , has written that ethnic nationalism , xenophobia , racism , and antisemitism are core values of many russian rodnover groups , and that they base their ideology on the aryan myth .
the values of β and ϵ for values of κ from 0 to 0.0335 and of λ from -0.040 to +0.100 have been computed .
this i thought my duty to represent to your grace that you might not be deceived in their values , which are computed at four thousand pounds a year each .
yet , in spite of the unimportance of tutankhamen himself and the comparative lack of new historical data , the world-wide interest the discovery has evoked is amply warranted by the new appreciation of historical values it affords .
the mere color and beauty of certain furs of the same species often create a tremendous difference in the range of values .
the conditions he values seem to be , —permanence , respectful treatment , immunity from kicks and cuffs and from abuse , especially in his own tongue , and , above all , a quiet life , without _kitkit_ , which may be vulgarly translated , nagging .
the half-life for this decay is readily measurable , and values are given over a temperature range of 17° c ( 5.2 minimum ) to 45° c ( 0.56 minimum ) .
the years that followed were dramatic or commonplace , depending on one 's sense of values .
the evolution of values ; translated by helen stalker sellars .
the most ardent of impressionists wakes up sooner or later to the idea that he has been talking values all his life .
god is literally `` the conservation of values .
the model consists of an infinite series of the infinitesimal elements shown in the figure , and that the values of the components are specified per unit length so the picture of the component can be misleading .
sir j. j. thomson calculated these values on the assumption that the inertia of such particles is entirely of electrical origin , and thereby obtained values in remarkable agreement with the experimental .
what are you doing but breaking up all the social values -- weakening all the foundations of the social edifice !
the dominant values are selflessness , cheerfulness , unity , and optimism .
the dewey claim is intersected by numerous quartz dykes , carrying good values in gold and copper .
lower taxes on dwellings would mean lower rents for all persons who did not own their homes , and lower taxes for all owners whose residence values were unusually large relatively to their land values .
this means that the low values on the graph are the relevant information not the taller bars .
) < /fld > , < cd > a hand lever for working the values in starting an engine. < /cd > -- < col > starting hole < /col > , < cd > a loophole ; evasion. < /cd > < mark > [ obs .
in addition to 17 specific recommendations , iacobucci emphasized the need for establishing a government-to-government relationship that " incorporates an underlying respect for cultural , traditional , and historical values that are different .
rituals are enactments of shared meanings , norms , and values ; and this japanese rite of passage highlights a collective response among the nisei to the conventional dilemmas of growing older .
the values were actually soviet but instead user ymb29 attempted to represent them as finnish .
the correspondence of the gamut of values to that of the light and dark scale of such an actual scene is perfect .
singh has instilled values , and was very inspired by his father and his mother , who served in aligarh people .
bee whitford was a modern young woman , practical-minded , with a proper sense of the values that the world esteems .
except for the most refined work , intermediate values may be determined by interpolation .
random coil index ( rci ) predicts protein flexibility by calculating an inverse weighted average of backbone secondary chemical shifts and predicting values of model-free order parameters as well as per-residue rmsd of nmr and molecular dynamics ensembles from this parameter .
a decision upon this point has in our day gained new interest from the values which attach to the modern oyster-beds .
mbrs have changed to treat bit 7 as active flag and any values 01h .
study its growth , the shapes and sizes of its different parts , the values of its blossom , leaves , and stems , and of the jar in which it grows .
compared to their enfj counterparts , esfjs ' values tend to be based more on those of their social group than on an independent internal set of ethics .
accessors ( or " getters " ) that merely return the values of private member variables also depend upon similar message passing subroutines , instead of using a more direct assignment ( or comparison ) , adding to total path length .
the quantities of pollutants in the water may vary and the molluscs may reflect past rather than present values .
just the values are slightly different .
i should then think that if we could measure the values of tools in the past with those of to-day , such implements as early man had were expensive , and worth comparatively more to him than our tools are to us .
with colonel tom ’ s help she had made a careful estimate of the values of their holdings at the time of consolidation and refused flatly to accept a penny beyond that amount .
`` yes , she values them , _parbleu ! _ and at the same time she laughs at them .
the _henrici-coradi_ analyser has to add up the values of dy.sin n [ theta ] and dy.cos n [ theta ] .
this figure may also be affected by a number of external factors , as can the power and torque values .
the reader can easily judge therefrom of the fairness of the present values .
the only cases , however , in which we have experimental values of this quantity are when the substance is either liquid and surrounded by similar liquid , or gaseous and surrounded by similar gas .
diagram 2 considers two possible values of q _ 2 .
by repetition under unremitting attention to the written values .
forget what you 've read about stuffy old-fashioned georgian social values , the truth was that if you wanted a bit of hows-your-father , london , specifically covent garden , was the place to go .
hayden lost his re-election bid primarily because of voter passage of a property reclassification amendment in kansas which resulted in property reappraisals - the first in some cases in 20 years - and the resulting property tax increases when market values were applied to properties for tax purposes .
now we are quite sure that this was not said in a cynical tone , for mr carlyle values the freshness and enthusiasm of youth , as every great man must .
again , is thought of as a column vector containing components with the allowed values of .
academy , thereby creating leaders who would be intellectually prepared with broad social knowledge and strong ethical values to make a positive impact on society .
rick ( jarod rawiri ) is so rocked by the tragedy that he is forced to confront his own secrets and his allegiance to maori values .
comte 's ideal state would be as ill to live in for any unfortunate being who values personal liberty as a theocracy or any socialistic utopia .
this is clearly seen when we compare the values found in years of many and of few sun-spots for the fourier coefficients in the diurnal inequality .
the model explains that if sodium pumps can be confined by the closed end of the lis , with particular values inhabiting the parameters that characterize a very specific system , then the constant can be zero and equilibrium will have been reached .
stellar structure codes ( meaning computer programs calculating the model 's variables ) either interpolate in a density-temperature grid to obtain the opacity needed , or use a fitting function based on the tabulated values .
the true values of biography .
the value should be selected in such a way that it is guaranteed to be distinct from all legal data values , since otherwise the presence of such values would prematurely signal the end of the data ( the semipredicate problem ) .
one of the values - the 6d red and black - is very rare despite it being one of the most commonly used rates as it was the stamp duty tax on cheques .
engaged at these , the individual invests the best of himself or herself and strives continuously to improve , while in the process contributing objective values to others .
in the records of khu one reads , `` the state of khu values men , not gems nor robes . ''
again , at the universities , it is urged , that all goes to form what england values as the flower of its national life , -- a well-educated gentleman .
strangely enough johnnie consadine , who had no knowledge of any other life except through a few well-conned books , appreciated the values of this mountain existence with almost the detached view of an outsider .
their next few records were criticized by critics and fans as being musically all over the place , veering from their hard rock roots , and suffering from poor production values .
for tramways with multiple eras of operation , specify the values unique to each era using the parameters from the appropriate " era " section .
one reason behind the change was that some youth associations started showing their dissatisfaction at values imposed by the contests .
[ 201 ] the conception of absolute values is lost by j. s. mill , and the distinction which he draws in connection with the problem of the standard of deferred payments ( not so called by mill ) is between values ( relative ) and _cost of production_ .
the idea of distance , of perspective , of volume is given us by darker or lighter colours : this idea is what is called in painting the sense of values .
to increase sensitiveness to leadership , but also to make that sensitiveness selective of true values , is one of the great educational problems of a democracy .
persons who subscribe to relatively egalitarian and communitarian values , in contrast , readily credit claims of environmental risks , which is consistent with their moral suspicion of commerce and industry as sources of inequality and symbols of excessive self-seeking .
based on pre-war values . )
he values very deeply your message of loyalty and devotion and your assurance that you will uphold the administration of our beloved faith .
there are a number of hunter ranks , given numerical values from hr1 to hr5 .
had the parameter space been finite and with a number of elements smaller than n , it might be possible to solve the linear equations in g ( t ) obtained by substituting the values of r and get solutions different from 0 .
if you used the r values you would just add .
this considers cultural ideals , values , and rules about sexual expression which are external to the individual .
for column nine values column the first .
the series was produced using the limited animation technique , whose production values contrasted sharply to their popeye theatrical counterparts .
it is the final cause of nature and man , the realization of their imminent upward effort , the essence that would contain all their values and escape all their imperfections .
more generally , a function is subharmonic if and only if , in the interior of any ball in its domain , its graph lies below that of the harmonic function interpolating its boundary values on the ball .
lululemon athletica has seven core values that educators employed by the company are expected to articulate and embody .
the report also found that audiences rated the production values and jameson 's performance as leela highly , while k9 was popular with younger viewers .
the choices of allowed values of p depend on the theory .
it is to determine what these values are that the engineer among others has been called on .
recommended timing values for sync code were added .
it lacks the homely , daily touches , no doubt ; but in compensation it reveals to us the spiritual values in life .
our dedication to moral values must be complete in our dealings abroad and in our relationships among ourselves .
it can be approximated by dividing the range between states a and b into many values of λ at which the expectation value is estimated , and performing numerical integration .
the cardinal vowels ( a , e , i , o , u ) are very close to their usual values in , e .
this variation in output is translated into changes of diameter after a simple calibration and the caliper log is printed as a continuous series of values of hole diameter with depth .
technically , a picture may be considered as an _informal_ pattern , mainly of tone and values ; while a pattern may be considered as a _formal_ pattern , mainly of planes of colour .
`` nay , my son , '' cajoled jezibaba , `` a youth is here , in truth , but only because he values your advice . ''
another view of franchise values , as stated by george h. benzenberg , past-president , am .
metadata may include song name , track number , artist name , and also audio normalization values .
the intent here is not to stifle disagreement , exclude key actors from the political process or suggest that democracy be uniform and disregard local cultures and values .
johnson and many sycophants to assure that the twenty-five-feet-tall example of quintessential kitsch be placed at the most public place in a city that is noted for its cultural values and appreciation of fine art .
his very correct feeling for values makes him an excellent painter ; but what interests him beyond all , is psychologic expression .
his father 's professional concerns for his parishioners left birch with much time on his own , and he often raised small amounts of money for himself by picking up soft drink bottles for their deposit values , and generally learned to function independently .
steele resided at white house ( ty gwyn , as it is called in welsh ) , a clean farm-house half way between caermarthen and llangunnor church , which is situate on a hill commanding extensive views of one of the prettiest values in wales .
not only is it that no standard of relative values has yet been agreed upon ; but the existence of any such standard has not been conceived in a clear manner .
there are applications to mean values involving the riemann zeta function , primes in short intervals , primes in arithmetic progressions , the spectral theory of automorphic functions and related topics .
negative soi index values are associated with warm-phase or el nino-like conditions and a northeastward displacement of the spcz .
gwendolen , aunt-dragoned , and baedeker in hand , meant the return to the acceptance of the old values that had once filled him with complacency .
it is for this reason , together with the passing of materialistic standards of pomp and circumstance and the growing insistence upon human values , that the women are demanding full citizenship .
these cadres favored the maoist system of social and political control and regarded themselves as supervisors of the masses who subscribed to a common set of communist values .
the values for good or evil mount up from hour to hour , and their issues must be fulfilled .
now the americans and british had to believe that the soviet union was helping protect the values those countries cherished from fascism for the soviets to continue receiving those countries ' support .
there was one addition to the list of values in this set during its period of use -- a 2 cent stamp .
in the great white , the corpse of christ is drawn with a delicate and supple line and modelled by its own reliefs without any effort of _nuances_ , thanks to deviations of imperceptible values .
i see wikipedia 's diversity of values and opinions to be a strength that we draw on to make a better , and more well-rounded , encyclopedia .
`` even simeon deaves values his skin more than his money ! ''
the felt variations in its tone are attached to the observed movement of its objects ; in these objects its values are imbedded .
macros access the visual studio automation object model and easily combine vs commands with useful automation property values to get the desired behavior .
the furstenberg boundary , roughly speaking , is a universal moduli space for the poisson integral , expressing a harmonic function on a group in terms of its boundary values .
waste consequent upon lack of knowledge of food values is the waste that is doubly expensive for it not only wastes food but it also wastes the system whose energy is exhausted in trying to assimilate improper alimentation .
=tables for engineers and mechanics= , giving the values of the different trains of wheels required to produce screws of any pitch .
the authors conclude that , the specific need for taurine supplementation aside , " a natural diet may not always be as healthy as imagined , and that even measuring nutrient values may not predict how a diet will perform after being fed for many months .
the master then averages the clock times , ignoring any values it receives far outside the values of the others .
there are few , if any , who have more intimate or comprehensive knowledge of realty values or whose judgment is more to be relied upon and these facts have served to bring him an extensive and desirable clientage .
intellect would tend to gauge things impersonally by their intrinsic values , since intellect is itself a sort of disembodied and universal function ; it would tend to disregard material conditions and that irrational substratum of reason without which reason would have no organs and no points of application .
hispanic americans often are very religiously oriented and focus on family values and the importance of intergenerational connections .
the sum total of values is lessened .
note that the reason why excluding the word itself is necessary , and why it even makes sense at all , is that in a gibbs sampling context , we repeatedly resample the values of each random variable , after having run through and sampled all previous variables .
overall buffalo milk has greater nutritional properties and values than cow milk .
the civil code of the community remained based on the ancient traditions and values .
for dutch people , the gooi area is synonymous with the broadcasting industry , the affluence of the area 's inhabitants and high property values .
in addition to his books ' military , adventure and exploration focus , he often describes societies with cultural values significantly different from modern western views .
prior to computers , people typically evaluated trigonometric functions by interpolating from a detailed table of their values , calculated to many significant figures .
all day i have been looking at myself and at my home with a new revelation of values .
' [ 324 ] we can thus , on the one hand , compare values at different periods .
the important point is that it helps keep alive a sense of history and of the changing nature of values .
this reduction of all values to immediate appreciations , to sensuous or vital activities , is so inevitable that it has struck even the minds most courageously rationalistic .
this , of course , does not apply to extrinsic values , _i.e._ , values due to fashion , exclusive designs , or proprietary articles .
you can tell how large to make the parts , where to put them , and what arrangement of values to use , only by trying several ways , and then selecting the most beautiful .
a transference of values is constantly taking place ; what was once the very standard of morality becomes immoral , what was once without question immoral becomes a new standard .
income drawdown carries the risks of investment values going down and gad rates reducing through changes in life expectancy or interest rates .
add the values of the _new form_ of the name jehovah , 21 + 501 + 21 = 543 , or , by a reverse reading , 345 ; thus showing moses to be a form of jehovah in this combination .
in its modern form , the praxe is suited to social and cultural values of the present , where such concepts as civil rights , gender equality and citizenship , are more strictly enforced than in the past .
if values of m are known for a number of rivers , they may be used in inferring the probable discharge of other similar rivers .
a list of minimum dollar values by state can be found on the stolen-property .
message waiting indication group of dcs values serves to set or reset flags indicating presence of unread voicemail , fax , e-mail or other messages .
a compendium of academic criticism was published , since 2005 , thornhill has proposed that many human values evolved to protect against pathogens .
at the conclusion of most of the stories , hawn goes on to relate how those particular circumstances and encounters with people taught her valuable lessons and values in life .
note , however , that all published dissociation constant values refer to the specific ionic medium used in their determination and that different values are obtained with different conditions , as shown for acetic acid in the illustration above .
we are now within the royal gate , and none speaks here above his breath who values the safety of his tongue . ''
even the social values of languages are less than they used to be , as the finer art of conversation has declined .
it follows that the capacities of equal lengths of a tube will usually be unequal , and therefore it is necessary to ascertain by experiment the true values of equal linear divisions of a tube at various parts of it .
in order to map the json-ld syntax to rdf , json-ld allows values to be coerced to a specified type or to be tagged with a language .
normal-cardinality column values are typically names , street addresses , or vehicle types .
he also stressed that olympio " embodies , more than any other , the ideals and values of our party " and that his own candidacy represented a commitment to continuing olympio 's work .
returns the union of the values of n tables , as an array .
lua does not contain a separate ephemeron construct , but its table data structures may be set to holds its keys , values , or both in a weak fashion .
cadets will be taught to show commitment to each other , to the academy and its values , and to excellence in all their endeavours .
if we are wise , if we have a proper sense of values , we shall find it worth our while to familiarize ourselves with scriptural phrases , with mythology , history , folk-lore , or whatever will aid us in seizing the innermost significance of masterpieces .
traditional elements of identity are the orthodox faith , cyrillic script and military history , while modern elements are language and literature , civic , social and political values , concern for ethnic status and national organisation , and commitment to the liberation of yugoslavia .
this debt , combined with the recession of the early 1980s that saw land values tumble , resulted in nu-west losing it place of dominance in the industry .
cross-membership communication within a community encourages groups to form organically according to their similar shared values , interests , and opinions .
conduct as moral may thus be defined as _activity called forth and directed by ideas of value or worth , where the values concerned are so mutually incompatible as to require consideration and selection before an overt action is entered upon_ .
legal factors often play a more direct part in connection with the value of money than in connection with other values , but they do not dominate the value of money .
utilizing memory segmentation , there are different ways to calculate the register values , e .
vci values are not necessarily consistent from one end of the connection to the other , the concept of a circuit is consistent ( unlike ip , where any given packet could get to its destination by a different route than the others ) .
( 6 ) when surrender values were granted in the monthly allowance class , medical examination at the policy holder 's expense should be insisted on and payment should in no case exceed 95 per cent of the present value of the monthly allowance .
the varying gratifications yielded by consumption goods , and their values in different conditions can not be explained without taking account of differences in time .
in other words , it is a personal set of values that may be handed down from one generation to another or learned via a communal setting that can be applied to interpretation and thus accept or reject a particular fact , idea , or position .
turning then to the older persian language , of the time of darius , for the spelling of the name of this king , he gave alphabetic values to certain of these signs which he supposed might spell the name of darius .
the minutest details , or the broadest diffusion together with the power of working from the highest to the lowest keys of _chiaroscuro_ are values that can only be realized when the infatuation consequent on successfully working the process is experienced .
we shall often find , especially in the field of the social values to which we shall shortly turn , that tarde 's contention is highly significant , particularly with reference to economic values , and there , particularly in the matter of credit phenomena .
making decisions that balance the values of environmental stewardship , social responsibility and economic vitality to meet our present needs without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their needs .
a large overlaps between hobbyist hackers and the programmer subculture hackers existed during the homebrew club 's days , but the interests and values of both communities somewhat diverged .
booleans or classical truth values ) .
to put myself forward would be like printing a book at request of friends , that the publick may be charmed with what , in fact , it values at a doit .
one foremost enthusiast of the idea of asian values is the former prime minister of singapore , lee kuan yew .
the first way simply leads the patient back to the point of departure , having lost the vital values contained in the collective psyche .
for your own sake , you ought to attach more importance to monetary considerations , cultivate a greater sense of values , develop more practical commercial sense .
the nrpa values the environment by offering environmental educational programs , and striving for ecologically responsible management .
the overwhelming preponderance of values of mineral deposits as a whole is found in the second of the classes named .
based on monitoring data provided by the international grizzly bear committee as well as other sources , vital ground seeks out private lands conservation imperative to the recovery of the threatened grizzly bear and critical to maintaining and enhancing the public values of surrounding public lands .
many neighborhoods still struggle with urban blight and crime , as well as lowered property values caused by the great recession , which hit the city particularly hard .
livadia palace depicting the royal family and many other cultural values .
the more ordered the data originally was , the fewer b values there will be that need to be merged into a .
exhibitions and programs allow students from all background to explore the values and beliefs that americans and allies embraced during world war ii through a mobile museum .
it also addresses the difficulties of the acculturation process , and the tensions caused by the different perspectives and values of second and third generation americans as the hero , a harvard student , attempts to navigate between american and italian-american culture .
instead players should target which tricks they win to avoid getting pairs of cards with negative point values .
it becomes evident that there is a certain gradation of values in the qualities which a folk-music may possess .
if she can not devise a way to know this for a certainty , as she values her happiness , let her take no step further .
successive values , to be compared , must be represented ; but the conditions of representation are such that they rob objects of the values they had at their first appearance to substitute the values they possess at their recurrence .
that the total number of zeros of r ( s , z ) is finite is at once obvious , these values being obtainable by rational elimination of s between [ f ] ( s , z ) = 0 , r ( s , z ) = 0 .
unfortunately , however , there has existed amongst philosophers a want of agreement as to the _unit_ to which the relative values of the other numbers shall be referred .
is it nothing to trifle with your friend ’ s feelings and mine—to endeavour to steal a woman ’ s affections from her husband—what he values more than his gold , and therefore what it is more dishonest to take ?
provides for review.= -- one of the most important values of the preparatory step is the opportunity given for the review of old ideas .
she had learned from dealing with her grandmother that the way to get the most money was by seeming ignorant of money values , a cover behind which she could shame madam bowker into giving a great deal more than she would have given on direct and specific demand .
our mission is to promote self-confidence , self-worth and traditional values in our contestants .
it is immediately shown to the court jeweller , who values it at a hundred louis .
the practical values of individual hymns not the least important consideration in the study of hymns is clearly to envisage their several effective values .
that same year , she presented hawai i with its first codified body of laws modeled after christian ethics and values and the ten commandments .
six-shooter in hand , i could descend upon this covey , compel a readjustment of values between them and myself , then back through the steel door , lock it behind me , and make off .
land values are advancing so rapidly that the production of cheap meats will be impossible .
what estimation it may be of is above my skill , but he values it as the greatest antiquity of the greek church .
grass pollen levels for friday have increased from the moderate to high levels of yesterday with values of around 6 to 7 across most parts of the country .
it 's important information , but the whole series could have used higher production values and better editing .
in a class-action lawsuit filed by 340 people , the company was accused of lowering nearby land values due to radioactive contamination both at the site of the mill and along the railroads of santa fe railway .
you could have a macro copy and paste ( paste special , values ) the input and output cells from the model sheet to the log sheet .
caste , effect on increase of population , 332 ; effect on values , 268 .
mothers the times talked to in 2003 dismissed kaidangku as out of step with the values of china 's growing middle class .
designating each by name , `` every man who values life , help me now ! ''
`` phil '' d. armour , head of the armour packing company , was one who arrived late in july , and whose opinion was immediately sought ; and his answer indicated the unbounded confidence inspired in the minds of even outsiders by the unheard-of development of land values .
only , i would insist , virtue as well as depravity is a factor in the social will , and plays its rôle in determining economic values , and motivating economic activities .
these new values were extolled in the theories of " utility " , " constructive sincerity , " " esthetics or harmony " and " social or moral value .
game rules modifications do not affect this game mode , so all settings are always on their default values .
`` [ 12 ] he is concerned to determine not only this general tendency of values to a normal , but all those characteristic circumstances as well which condition this tendency and which determine the normal to which values tend .
in five minutes he learnt that cut-and-dried codes are no good when the hard facts of every-day life have to be faced and that expediency is a factor in human existence which has its moral values .
: table of strategic values .
i have observed _n_ values of _x_ and the corresponding values of _y_ .
in macbeth iii 1 94 the _valued file_ is the file that determines values or ranks .
at 8 and 12 percent the values for the period were 144 and 192 percent , respectively , of the control rate .
the values so obtained gradually diminished with the increase of temperature .
this novel is a saga of changing social order and decadent set of values .
an outcast garden exhibit , colonnade this epic figure , `` an outcast , '' compelling by its earnestness and the tragedy of its motive idea , is handled with firmness , assurance and a perfect sense of volume and sculptural mass values .
some general constructions are known for values of d and k outside the range shown in the table .
at teneriffe the dip has been frequently observed ; but the values assigned by different observers vary so much as to indicate a more than usual frequency of local disturbance , which might also be expected from the geological character of that island .
but gameloft knows how to do make a game with high production values , that loses little because of the transition .
after stalin 's death ( 5 march 1953 ) , his successors , while vying for control over the soviet leadership , promoted the values of collective leadership .
the values thus measured are usually sub scripted ( by p and v , respectively ) to indicate the definition .
jazz had become popular music in the country , although older generations considered the music immoral and threatening to old cultural values .
integration is just adding up an infinite number of values to get the area under a curve .
the record was fed slowly through the field by means of the chain screw on the phonograph carriage ; and measurements of the lengths of syllables gave their time values .
the colour red symbolizes charity and justice , two very important values .
alhazai provide historic and modern day information through it is media output , with news and other cultural values exclusively to the internet users and the world at large .
the one , two , five , and ten cent values of the new united states newspaper stamps have thus far been issued .
in 1986 , the changes had been generally partial and made on certain values of coins only , following a comprehensive major revision of coin production in denomination , composition , size and pattern , they included and addition of 1 satang and 10 baht coins .
oh , everything and every one , my lord , unless it were himself ; he values not a woman as a velvet , or a wife at half the price of silver-threaded woof .
anyhow , this poet values his beautiful hair , and you will see him sitting in front of his fireplace , reading a book , and meanwhile his fingers run here and there over his head , and he grabs a bunch of hair and pulls and twists it .
the media depend on a society 's economic system for 1 ) inculcation and reinforcement of free enterprise values , 2 ) establishing and maintaining linkages between producers and sellers , and 3 ) controlling and winning internal conflicts , such as between management and unions .
the values of the four varieties are , 1/2 anna , $ 3 ; 2 annas , $ 12 ; 4 annas , $ 25 ; 8 annas , $ 75 .
for the basic problem of identifying organelles , very high accuracy values can be obtained , including better than results .
a jitter meter is a testing instrument for measuring clock jitter values , and is used in manufacturing dvd and cd-rom discs .
ethnic values of [ [ six vilayets ] ] according to presented data .
he told the new york times , " psychologists don 't have the knowledge to do what they attempt to do when they do custody evaluations , " adding that custody decisions are more about competing values than scientific findings when determining a child 's best interest .
as they build their hierarchy , the joneses should investigate the values or measurements of the different elements that make it up .
creating this hypothetical , yet important space for hip hop in tanzania was a way to unite rappers to lyrically express their culture , values and goals , and overall way of life .
it hates corners and sharp points of character , hates quarrelsome , egotistical , solitary , and gloomy people ; hates whatever can interfere with total blending of parties ; whilst it values all peculiarities as in the highest degree refreshing , which can consist with good fellowship .
2 5 2 63 peanuts ( as purchased ) 15 nuts 6 9 6 33 all of these values are approximate .
crown illumination values ranged from 1 , which indicated low light , and 6 , which indicated that the tree crown was completely exposed .
i 'll give my nose -- true , it 's only a small one , but everybody values that feature most -- if they don't persuade him to leave that horrible crow 's nest in the middle of the sea .
it is not easy for a busy practitioner to figure out these dietary values , and for this reason the calculated series of diets given here may be of service .
the most significant thing about these `` absolute '' values from the standpoint of our present inquiry , seems to be the resistance which they offer to the '' marginal process . ''
hunt , clara w. , `` values in library work with children , '' 275-82 .
they then visit an adult film store , where the cook preaches about the values of pornography in america .
programming constants are a values that , unlike a variable , cannot be reassociated with a different value .
in a society in which changes come fast , individuals cannot depend on routinized behavior or tradition in making decisions , whether on practical everyday or professional matters , moral values , or political issues .
and ought i not to bestow her on one who values her at so great price ? ''
some day we shall see these things in their own surprising values and fresco our village libraries with them -- yes , and our drug stores , too .
the explanation is simple : the die of this large 5 cent stamp had been engraved in 1867 with the other values of the first dominion series , [ 87 ] but as there were no rates requiring such a denomination in the set , it was not issued .
if subproblems can be nested recursively inside larger problems , so that dynamic programming methods are applicable , then there is a relation between the value of the larger problem and the values of the subproblems .
jewish secular humanistic education inculcates universal moral values through classic jewish and world literature and through organizations for social change that aspire to ideals of justice and charity .
now values are clearly determined and graded as far as human beings or any similar creatures are concerned .
zava 'ah " ) is a document designed to pass ethical values from one generation to the next .
western values and especially the victorian era brought these institutions to an end when the english succeeded the dutch in india .
the ladder of values from the sublunary world with its irregular , extravagant , imperfect motion up to the stellar universe , with its self-returning perfect order , corresponded to the middle terms of the older logic .
the highest values in this scale are absolute , eternal , and super-individual , and lower values are assigned their place in virtue of their correspondence to or participation in these absolute values .
because the values of the constants are quite small , it is common for manufacturers to quote them per kilometre rather than per metre ; in the english-speaking world " per mile " can also be used .
davis voted to require colleges and universities to make student centers compatible with traditional family values .
they are frequently borne away with such a desperate ardor , that , when the loser has given up his arms , the only part of his property which he greatly values , he sets the power over his life at a single cast to the winner or usurer .
what knowledge , skills , beliefs , and values of this family must be considered as the family attempts to adapt ( i .
with the aid of this larger scale , we can more easily compare the values of the colors of a landscape , a flower , or a still-life group with the same values in gray .
the main measurements of barnard davis 's western eskimo skulls , converted to metric values , follow .
agriculture contributes less than 10 percent of the island 's gdp , but its contribution is vital , as it also generates indirect benefits , by maintaining the rural appearance , and supporting tenerifian cultural values .
as to a thorough eradication of prostitution , nothing can accomplish that save a complete transvaluation of all accepted values -- especially the moral ones -- coupled with the abolition of industrial slavery .
and even when they are not actually impossible it may frequently appear on examination that they are only rendered possible by the occasional introduction of agencies which are not supposed to be available in the production of the more ordinary or intermediate values .
it has been shown how eucken establishes a _new world_ with its own laws and values within the spiritual life .
the depression years of the 1930s were a quiet time for the area , which saw slight population growth and property values lower than during the 1920s .
the values to be stored in this structure can be either values provided by cori ( collectors of resource information ) or custom values generated by the sed itself .
the jewels that she values are truth and innocence : those will adorn her ever ; and for the rest , she wore them for a husband 's pride , and to his wants will give them .
in portugal the name almude was used and their values were much larger than the spanish ones .
his efforts focused on areas of national security , counter-terrorism , alternative energy and energy security , commerce and investment , and promotion of shared values .
curve vi is absolutely correct , however , as these values have been obtained from the oscillograph record .
the dome is by no means a proved commercial success as yet from the mine standpoint , although the possessor of much ore , because of the uncertain average values .
once all missing values have been imputed , the data set can then be analysed using standard techniques for complete data .
memory allocation routines fill guard bytes with values that are not supposed to be used by the programmer 's algorithms .
hematological values in deer mice in relation to botfly infection .
although this fraction is too small to be observed by ordinary means , yet , if it exists , it can not be ignored if absolute values are sought .
this also is a matter for the reporter ’ s judgment of news values .
he values himself , as a carman does his horse , by the money he gets , and looks down upon all that gain less as scoundrels .
the speciation diagram obtained using these pk values shows three distinct regions .
one girl values me at a considerably higher figure than another does . ''
missing values in the last two fields are interpreted as zeros .
the project also displays connectedness of the city by its many bed and breakfasts , close family values , available water attractions and its unique downtown of small businesses .
the results no doubt are compared with known values for specific types of gem .
kernel convolution usually requires values from pixels outside of the image boundaries .
in that case , however , exp { is [ 0 , 0 , 0 , [ phi ] ( z ) ] } would also be an integral function of z with modulus less than unity for all finite values of z .
to me , that speech seemed to give schnitzel 's view of the values of his life .
in loose usage , correlation can refer to any departure of two or more random variables from independence , but technically it refers to any of several more specialized types of relationship between mean values .
[ illustration ] in may , 1905 , appeared also three new values printed on multiple crown c.a .
with the problem continuing after the 1880s , conflict arose between the met , who wished to make more openings in the tunnels , and the local authorities , who argued that these would frighten horses and reduce property values .
the movement also recognises that there are many different conceptions of zionism and values them all .
it has become famous for its portrayal of western espionage methods as morally inconsistent with western democracy and values .
euclidean distance measures the geometric distance between two vectors , and so considers both the direction and the magnitude of the vectors of gene expression values .
i have pointed out to the congress that we are seeking to find the way once more to well-known , long-established but to some degree forgotten ideals and values .
though in effect embracing the lines of fleet supply , they correspond in strategical values not to military lines of supply , but to those internal lines of communication by which the flow of national life is maintained ashore .
so the decent thing to do is to take the natural logarithm of all your weights before computing mean values and standard deviations .
more complex methods can be employed to better approximate the exact number of possible configurations , and achieve results closer to measured values .
the plate flaws exist for all the values of all the printings and their number is very important .
one problem with the basic mtf transform is that it makes the same changes for any character , regardless of frequency , which can result in diminished compression as characters that occur rarely may push frequent characters to higher values .
neither in respect to color values nor in respect to brightness range is it the object of aerial photography , especially for war purposes , to present a truthful tone reproduction .
the author can not state whether all the values bore both imprints , having only seen the 1 , 2 and 3 cents with the first , and the 30 and 90 with the second , the latter without the grille .
what is it that drives them to yield up these products for speculation's sake to those who produce nothing , and to content themselves with only a fractional part of the values which they produce ?
good deeds performed on gospel motives , though unknown and unvalued by the world , will not go unrecompensed or unowned by him who values the cup of cold water given in his name .
how much truth can a certain mind endure ; how much truth can it dare ? -- these questions became for me ever more and more the actual test of values .
note that , if the kardashev scale value was closer to one , this type of percision would be inapproriate , but in the midsection of this logathmic scale , it is specially appropriate due to the statistical values we know .
facilitation was then used in order to reach a group consensus on the estimate values .
it was worth , perhaps , a few cents an acre ; it was utterly untillable , almost inaccessible , and his gratulation owed its fervor only to its spiritual values .
in other words , thomas plays the theatre as steinitz played chess , with certain recognized openings and certain stated values to the characters .
[ 31 ] further , let the home keep this day as the one of personal values all the way through , sacred to that life of love , friendship , and joy in the presence of one another which is the essential life of the family .
`` pardon me , '' i rejoined , `` i but express the sentiments of any man who values moral worth , and looks upon life as a great responsibility to be accounted for . ''
vlad 's relationship becomes strained as cawti 's changing values pull her away from his lifestyle .
around 1945 , a similar set was issued but with the portrait of king george vi and with values ranging to 50r .
estimating ore values .
to emphasize his works for their own sake would consequently be to set up false values .
automatic logging of relevant parameters over a long enough time for the fault to manifest can help ; parameter values at the time of the fault may identify the cause so that appropriate remedial action can be taken .
it is helpful to fan one 's cards out so that if they have corner indices all their values can be seen at once .
it includes sampling bias , in which some numbers and values pertaining to this or that type of casualties are more likely to be included than others .
and , ardently as he longed to win the day for springfield , no questionable proposals , however alluring , were allowed to blunt in any further degree his fine sense of moral values .
it is necessary to maintain the parallel plates in the air region sufficiently long so that the vertical electric-field component of the original mode ( represented in the parallel-plate guide by the below-cutoff tm1 mode ) has decayed to negligible values at the open end .
it is based on the values , traditions , and rites of the ancient tribes of northern europe .
table of galvanometer constants. -- values of h. boston | .699| chicago | .759| denver | .919| jacksonville | 1.094| london | .745| minneapolis | .681| new york | .744| new haven | .731| philadelphia | .783| portland , me .
and it will seek to bring these values to closer acquaintance with each other than has hitherto been the case .
old standards had fallen , new standards had been reared , new values had attached to crime , therefore they demanded that the business in hand go on .
total values , $ 773,089,275 .
= -- kk -- 22 as a public appearance number.= when the values of the initials added together make 22 , it indicates an ability to come before the public in a masterly vibration , as an organizer .
the goal of the covenant is to build a community of faith and learning centered around common values .
this very closely corresponds with the values of the median of the accompanying series , which itself agrees with the value of the average of the indices .
the wartime climate provided an opportune environment for mussolini to reinforce the values which he extolled as central to his purported hegemonic masculinity .
the problem of translating the fundamental theory of value into money market terms , and of translating the phenomena of the money market into terms of fundamental values is not easy .
other performance values can also be measured , such as path length to the escape box , with a shorter path indicating fewer errors .
creed and dogma are dropping into the background and will soon be discarded , while the spiritual values which grow out of , and express , human nature and life are steadily forging to the front .
of the sulphide group by far the most important mineral is chalcocite ( cuprous sulphide ) , which supplies the bulk of the values in the majority of the mining camps of the western hemisphere .
but certainly the historic values of the site , as established through its nrhp listing , make it of encyclopedic value .
a sense of humour means a sense of proportion and therefore an appreciation of values , so ambrose thompson , the young kentucky romeo , was not without a certain thrifty streak .
it is somewhat tame , lacking the change of hue and chroma , but giving a monotonous harmony of regular values .
and this helps us to understand that the compositions described in the immediately succeeding and closely connected clause are also silver values .
haebara , in addition , the examinee distribution over which the criterion function is minimized may be set to the observed theta estimates , a histogram of theta estimates , a kernel density estimate of theta estimates , or uniformly spaced values on the theta scale .
instead of answering these questions directly , perhaps it will be better to point out the various methods of the recitation , set down their characteristics and relative values , and then formulate a conclusion .
because each shock affects x values infinitely far into the future from when they occur , any given value xt is affected by shocks occurring infinitely far into the past .
the game was released in 1997 after two years of work , but outdated production values , confusing user interface and inadequate shareware marketing resulted in fewer than a hundred sales .
the kill and zkill commands are used to delete subtrees of values .
sketches 3 and 4 show simple groups of still life , first drawn in outline from the objects , and then painted in values chosen from the value scale .
in consequence of the enforcement of this order of the common council , both the taxable values , and the inhabitants of the town , increased rapidly .
the bitter , yet merciful , lesson which death teaches us is to distinguish the gold from the tinsel , the true values from the worthless chaff .
`` and that , '' i added , `` is what i call having a proper subordination of values . ''
`` transportation and taxation , are two factors yet unnoticed , which materially affect rent values in great cities .
having found e0 , a and b , rücker and thorpe calculated values of the element for points defined by whole degrees of longitude ( from greenwich ) and half degrees of latitude .
his brain worked slowly , but he had a keen sense of the values of things .
but man , owing to the difficulty of pairing cats , has done nothing by methodical selection ; and probably very little by unintentional selection ; though in each litter he generally saves the prettiest , { 48 } and values most a good breed of mouse or rat-catchers .
its value is still further enhanced by the farmer 's independent position , and by his expectation of profiting by the future increase of land values .
linear measurements are in millimeters ; color values are in the arbitrary units described in a preceding paragraph .
non-pod return values or values larger than 64-bits , the calling code will allocate space and passes a pointer to this space via a hidden parameter on the stack .
i only present evidences that i believe the article has certain notable values and hopefully that the administrators could evaluate .
for all values of p except 3 it contains a simple self-conjugate subgroup of index 2 .
the beloved guardian greatly values the outstanding work which your assembly is doing .
the l-diversity technique is useful in that it may hinder an attacker leveraging the global distribution of an attribute 's data values in order to infer information about sensitive data values .
capitalism was also attacked as morally inferior to german values and as failing to provide for the german people .
vowels the vowels have continental values .
certain numerical relations between the primitive elements of the disturbing and disturbed planets may impart sensible values to terms which usually admit of being neglected .
delta values are calculated using the fresnel equations .
the combination of inversion and hermite conjugation is chosen so that in the singular value decomposition , the unitary factors remain the same and the iteration reduces to heron 's method on the singular values .
next , compute the sum of all the values and take the modulus of 7 .
a good example is the process of xml assigning values to properties ( elements ) .
based on where those values left off , new yukon kilometre posts were erected in fall 2002 between the b .
chinese ceramics produced in effectively industrial conditions , were produced according to a completely different set of artistic values .
it added , " these values are incorporated into the contractual obligations of each of our instructors and other employees .
he has neither friends nor enemies , but values men only as channels of power .
65 values did man only assign to things in order to maintain himself -- he created only the significance of things , a human significance !
some of the prospect work showed ore of high values .
but the attributes or values given to the card rather quarrel with the design , for they signify friendship , protection , and wisdom .
his father , the reverend rogers ( glenn ford ) , instilled in his children moral values which rogers puts into practice during the trial .
the strongly organized , international church maintained itself and saw an opportunity to realize its ideal , a civilization , or order , guided by itself and obedient to religious values .
the boundary element method attempts to use the given boundary conditions to fit boundary values into the integral equation , rather than values throughout the space defined by a partial differential equation .
consistently expressed values are included in the generated report .
striem conducted a study on both the 1927 jericho earthquake and the january 1837 event with a close look at damage data to gain a good estimate of modified mercalli intensity values .
to impact christians values and provie the most conducive atmosqhere for students to excel to support the manpower needs of the country .
the sign here then should have the value _kiš_ , or in old babylonian _giš_ , which is also one of the values of gissu , a determinative before the name of a light .
originally , all data structures in pick were hash-files ( at the lowest level ) meaning records are stored as associated couplets of a primary key to a set of values .
critics claim that standardized testing match the values , habits , and language of the test makers .
the brand 's presence on second life and other social media channels is part of a strategic choice to adopt new channels of communication so as to be closer to clients and convey the brand 's values .
according to ball , the major threats to these values are a naive and uninformed view of islam by many australians ( including the media ) , apathy and political correctness .
more than 600 operation smile student associations in the united states and around the world build awareness , raise funds and educate students about the values of commitment , leadership and volunteerism .
we who are in fish and wildlife work have had to readjust our thinking and values during recent years .
of the roots sought , five are irrational , the remaining are rational and are computed to their exact values .
afghans in iran have moved closer to mainstream iranian values in this regard ; the iranian influence has even filtered back into afghanistan .
`` colour values and perspective can only be expressed by thick and thin lines at varying distances apart . ''
incorporating third-party certification into forest product buying practices can be a centerpiece for responsible wood and paper purchasing policies that include factors such as the protection of sensitive forest values , thoughtful material selection and efficient use of products .
in these two examples , one encrypting and one decrypting , the alphabet is going to be the letters a through z , and will have the corresponding values found in the following table .
ratios of exchange are ratios between values .
he was able to exploit anticommunism , yearnings for " traditional " american values and dislike of civil rights agitators , anti-war protesters and sexual exhibitionists .
the amount of walking did not correlate well with the connectivity values indicating that other factors were at play .
he is a man out of time and seeks to protect the old way of life , and what he believes are important traditional values .
the predominance of the male over the female , of the man over the woman and of the father over the mother , has been accepted , almost without question , in a civilisation built up on the recognition of male values and male standards of opinion .
this is because it is not a good indicator of the center of the distribution when the distribution includes negative values .
these values are from a fairmont a4-d .
his wages were $ 1.50 a day , which the reader who multiplies fourpence by twenty , to make up the difference in money values , will find to be the wages of a good mechanic in the first edward ’ s time , five hundred years ago .
' i must desire my reader , as he values his repose , not to let his thoughts run upon anything loose or frightful for two hours at least before he goes to bed .
that kind of suggests to me that λ could have several different means within an experiment , since the range of observed counts ( the ks ) within the 1000 trials could encompass several different values .
and so i propound the question to myself as follows : `` have friends , like slaves , their market values ? ''
the sorghum products give market values as follows : 750 pounds sugar at say 5 cents , [ 2 ] $ 37.50 .
ferdinand ii , a man of the counter-reformation , who was determined not to compromise on catholic values and habsburg prestige .
it is only necessary to set the mechanical components to appropriate values to produce a filter with an identical response to the electrical counterpart .
this is in accordance with the density values given in table i .
known to the romans as a drachm , the dirhem was a unit of weight used across north africa , the middle east , and persia , with varying values .
`` which helen values not , '' said the young doctor , half in assertion and half in interrogation .
scrutinize all his departments severely ; for no man values his people 's lives less than my good friend john cheetham .
our ills are so deep-seated that in nearly every civilized country racial values would continue to depreciate even if all three were carried into effect .
some code page vendors insufficiently document the meaning of all code point values .
integers themselves , will compile now - a and b are unboxed , the integer values summed up , and the result is autoboxed into a new integer , which is finally stored inside variable c .
educational programs are inspired in human fundamental rights values and french and argentinean academic domestic traditions as well as in students ' academic excellence .
it shortly became apparent , however , that the italian data were not sufficiently dependable for him to make reliable inferences about that country 's currency values .
it moved away from the dance floor , with increased production values , experimental songwriting and sponsored by the greatest coca cola marketing campaign in latin america .
the emergency listing was in response to a proposed tarkine road , which would have coursed through old growth forest and detrimentally affected the natural values of undisturbed areas .
but you can compute it numerically for values of u , g and d , and even make graphs , if you like .
i myself find concentration of an extreme difficulty : the proportions of things have so changed and one's poor old `` values '' received such a shock .
{ 152 } dr. frankl liked to compare logotherapy to the role of the eye specialist : the logotherapist 's role is to help the patient see more clearly the range of lived values and meaning available to him .
the executive officer ; responsible for both units and values , accounting for the former by the current service return , and for the latter by properly balanced statements of the cost of articles fabricated or otherwise transformed .
he thinks he will take amber , for he knows how alec values him , and it will be sweet to be revenged .
ingeld and christ heroic concepts and values in old english christian poetry .
the inner circle revolves around the tensions that are bound to arise if a small group of people deliberately abandons the traditional moral values with which they were raised in favour of an unconventional outlook on love , marriage and sex .
the dallas equal suffrage association developed a suffrage campaign based on social values and community standards .
the projects aims to promote liberal values in three ways - by creating liberal groups in the media , art , and journalism .
it recognises that these efforts , often undertaken in the face of violence , persecution and imprisonment , are crucial to the successful establishment and protection of the universal values of respect of human rights and democracy that are at the heart of eu development policy .
she realises how deeply she still values public opinion , which she has cast to the winds in her reckless love for carol .
call this `` climbing '' if you will , and a stress upon false values .
in the discussion of english literature , the romantic period is often regarded as finishing around the 1820s , or sometimes even earlier , although many authors of the succeeding decades were no less committed to romantic values .
when an engraver , who is also an artist , attempts to interpret nature in black and white on the metal plate or wooden block , he endeavors to reproduce the `` values '' of the various parts of the subject before him .
nothing has changed at my end that i 'm aware of , but the letters are all now a bunch of boxes with their unicode values .
subst values came up for the url access date , so presumably someone has set up the default values for this template .
with the configuration file , errors can be turned off or on , errors can be assigned different priority values and each wikipedia can have their own whitelist .
in engineering terms , a power system is deemed stable if the substation voltage levels and the rotational speeds of motors and generators return to their normal values in a quick and continuous manner .
the word ' judicious ' used above refers to the therapist 's taking into account the specific strengths , weaknesses and values .
thus a saxon mother in her cradle-song informs the sleeping infant that she values it as high as a hundred florins ; while the grief over a beloved corpse often takes the form of counting up the exact pecuniary loss to the family sustained from the decease .
then he was led into a fireproof safe -- a solid stone apartment -- which was piled from floor to ceiling with sheets of postage-stamps of different values .
just as some critical theorists see their position as a moral commitment to egalitarian values , these postpositivists see their methods as driven by a moral commitment to these scientific values .
eloka values building sustainable relationships with northern communities and researchers and understands that those relationships can only be built on a foundation of trust .
by a similar careful calculation it has been possible to draw up a table of the relative values of various ordinary lights .
in this way beauty and ugliness are recognised as determined by our most fundamental self-preservative values .
_at the time of preparation ( june 2009 ) , saxon letters had been assigned unicode values , but font support was extremely limited .
too much rubbing with the stump gives muddiness , too little charcoal may weaken the values and you will have a “ washout. ” when the notan‐scheme is right , the drawing may be fixed .
even in his grief his strong strain of indifference to values , custom or common-sense kept to the fore .
her contributions may not be grade-a disruptive inside the subject area she edits , but when her actions cause multi-meagabyte discussions to occur outside the subject area her contributions redeeming values are greatly outweighed by the disruption they cause .
in this way he obtained supposed values of six letters in the cuneiform .
man passes judgment upon that which claims to be _true_ , _beautiful_ , or _good_ , thus referring to ideals and standards that define these values .
the commitment of most americans to republican values and to their property rights helped bring about the american revolution .
population pressures are enormous , property values are high , and new housing is constantly under development on the edges of the built-up areas .
ranges of values can be varied , such as including zero , or having negative values ( e .
in this period the increase in the sterling equivalents would be proportionately greater than that of the currency values .
in control theory , hankel singular values , named after hermann hankel , provide a measure of energy for each state in a system .
pierre tardivel in frameshift and mary vaughan in humans and hybrids ) as a way of comparing and contrasting the perceived values of the two countries .
sathya sai baba 's educare programme seeks to found schools throughout the world with the goal of educating children in the five human values .
for instance , for very large values of n approaching infinity , the process becomes constant-volume .
different analytical techniques have yielded somewhat different absolute solubility values .
the target set encompasses both military and societal values .
lyme is home to many of the physicians and professors from dartmouth college and has high real estate values as a result .
[ 119 ] “ it is not correct to say that the exchanged values are equal ; on the contrary , each party seeks to give a smaller value in exchange for a larger one .
support for defence of the national identity , faithfulness for christian values and the latin civilization .
the quasinorm is invariant under rearranging the values of the function f , essentially by definition .
it is this species of demand alone which , compared with the supply , determines prices and values .
i know she makes a great fuss about it , and rather values herself upon it .
c. negroes and property depreciation no single factor has complicated the relations of negroes and whites in chicago more than the widespread feeling of white people that the presence of negroes in a neighborhood is a cause of serious depreciation of property values .
woman must choose with discrimination those channels of activity wherein `` what she most highly values may be won . ''
_construction of formulae._ -- any difference of u of the rth order involves r + 1 consecutive values of u , and it might be expressed by the suffixes which indicate these values .
and the third are successively the present values of money payable after one , two , three , _ & c._ years , according to the rate of interest agreed on .
their play is innocent ; more , it may be helpful and educative ; we can insure these values in it by our participation .
if you define the field by a monte-carlo simulation , it doesn 't stay put , it slides to infinitely large values with time .
evil , like all other purely negative values , is unreal .
this shows that money values may be a most imperfect measure of aggregate wealth ; for what money values represent is the product of the quantity of the commodity and its _marginal_ utility , while aggregate wealth is _total_ utility , which is a very different thing .
the mean values of the several groups are so discordant , as is shown in table 1/2 , that a fairly precise numerical estimate seems impossible .
all this was not the result of any sudden revulsion on the part of the public , but came because some intelligent and clever workman , determining to make his interests and his sense of values the public 's , labored until he accomplished the task .
the project faced opposition from some in the community who thought the relocation of the a 's to fremont would increase traffic problems in the city and decrease property values near the ballpark site .
excluding relabeling , and with respect to the 81 grid cell values , the operations form a subgroup of the symmetric group s81 , of order 3 !
the novel form is therefore organised around the problematic hero in pursuit of problematic values within a problematic world .
they express the core values and educational philosophy of expeditionary learning .
the theory of _prices_ , as an abstract formula of description , is of primary interest to the scientist , who has nothing to do with the manipulation of concrete values , and who has no interests at stake in the behavior of particular values at a particular time .
`` i fancy you 've made a mistake in the values . ''
a value domain expresses the set of allowed values for a data element .
as more dissociations per molecule are possible , the intervals between individual pka and pkb values now start becoming smaller on the ph scale .
in practice , however , capacitors ( and rc circuits ) are usually preferred to inductors since they can be more easily manufactured and are generally physically smaller , particularly for higher values of components .
this objective standard of the things which are most important and precious to us , this ideal pattern of all human values , attests and manifests its existence by the primordial necessity of the interchange of thoughts among us .
consequently , cultural values such as the betawi culture was threatened .
literary values .
similarly , for frequencies above one gigahertz , q factor values for transmission-line resonators start to decrease with frequency .
the direct tension indicators shall conform to required chemical composition , compression load , and dimensional values .
midleton cbs was founded by the congregation of christian brothers in 1867 and has kept its catholic values to this day .
what the relative values of these different kinds of immediate knowledge are is a point which will have to be touched on at the end of our study .
it bases the assessment of value in part on the perception and experience of stakeholders , finds indicators of what has changed and tells the story of this change and , where possible , uses monetary values for these indicators .
gothic criticism and text , his position in the fin-de-siecle world can be delineated and the high values of his original work can be made visible .
the fitting of many models in statistics and econometrics usually seeks to minimise the difference between observed and predicted or theoretical values .
the shares of companies , which are only purchasable in whole numbers , are of various denominations , or face values ; and again these face values by no means represent the market value .
assessed values before the fire were $ 30,000,000 less than five years after .
mater values every dent made during his adventures with lightning as symbolic of their friendship .
no matter how many intervals you have , a cubic for each interval depends on the same number of local values .
in the figures to the right examples are given for several values of .
and i half-rose to return to my diminutive study , where i was slaving , just then , at an absorbing article on comparative aesthetic values in the blind and deaf .
i had lately been appointed member of a committee to examine and report upon the relative medicinal values of the various alkaloids obtained from cinchona .
the middle east forum promotes american interests in the middle east and protects western values from middle eastern threats .
the currency is in paper , at a varying discount , with coins of one , five , ten , and twenty kreutzers , based on the paper values .
in view of ongoing progress in lighting technology , target sec values will need to be periodically revised downwards .
all these values are computed to an average value for further analyses .
in metal engraving intermediary values may be obtained by lines of the same thickness , if need be , but of varying depth .
no definite rule has been observed , different persons giving totally different values to represent the consonant and vowel sounds .
chapter viii our common woods : their identification , properties and uses woods have different values for various practical purposes because of their peculiarities in structure .
pailey was inspired to write the book in order to give children the verbal tools to question the ethical and moral values of adults around them .
in particular , the center embraces the values of human dignity and social justice by widening access to quality higher education for adults .
the change from the other hemisphere had altered their sense of values .
the french villager , who values all domestic pets in proportion to the noise they can make , delights especially in his dogs , giant black-and-tan terriers for the most part , of indefatigable perseverance in their one line of activity .
the original idea had a separate encyclopedia , with a different philosophy ( an encyclopedia edited only edited by experts ) , so as not to violate wikipedia 's current values .
again , with a transvaluation of all values , that which to christianity was the highest in life and dominated the whole is regarded as a mere accompanying appearance ; indeed , a danger to the energy and truth of life .
human existence in the age of modernity requires there to be structures like church , neighbourhood and family to help establish a sense of belonging rooted in a commitment to values or beliefs .
the red guard tailored community service programs , such as breakfasts the black panther party provided and changed it to a sunday brunch for the elderly , reflecting their distinct cultural values and unique requirements as a community .
a work of art may contain one or all of these values ; but they do not constitute its unique value as art .
as much as possible , i have tried to adapt to existing templates by keepoing the return values and formats compatible with each other , and keeping the possibility to use the same parameters .
slightly higher values have been obtained , but 240 may be taken as the average value under these conditions .
other public administration theorists have argued that other non-legal values ought to guide civil servants .
but , both from the consideration of principles and the observation of phenomena , it is clear that the great initiatory cause is to be looked for in the speculative advance of land values .
their curative and preventive values are taken for granted .
instead , each team has to define them individually by trial and error ; a value too small results in workers standing idle for lack of work , whereas values too high tend to accumulate large amounts of unfinished work , which in turn hinders completion times .
made minor changes to punctuation and presentation of numerical values .
no matter what your idealogical perspective , i assume everyone values their safety .
according to the filmmakers website , the film " reveals that radical islamists driven by a religiously motivated rejection of western values cultures and religion are engaging in a multifaceted strategy to overcome the western world .
a single tax on land values is desirable .
in the former case , it allowed the claims of certain studies to be peculiar consignees of mental values , and indirectly strengthened their claim to superiority , since human beings would incline to regard human affairs as of chief importance at least to themselves .
a little more ink or a little less ink , or a little lighter or a little heavier impression , changes the values .
he values it as it deserves .
they were based on a vision of a deformed world in which battles are fought over the basic human values , which are constantly under threat .
the values a and b would both be functions in themselves , rather than parameters , so i am not talking about any specific wavefunction , just all wavefunctions generally .
in the meantime , there are ways to circumvent this in software using iterative refinement , which means values are calculated in double precision only when necessary .
her first works were of an asian american nature , attempting to make sense of being raised with eastern values while schooled in u .
in actual use , the names and amounts would be changed to the appropriate values .
however , if the etag values do not match , meaning the resource has likely changed , then a full response including the resource 's content is returned , just as if etags were not being used .
when you look for values you do not wish to see details nor things , you wish to see only masses and relations .
it is a part of parisian tradition , it colours parisian values , determines parisian standards .
he had lost all sense of human values in the terrible pageant before him .
besides , money is a commodity ; and , if all commodities are supposed to be doubled in quantity , we must suppose money to be doubled too , and then prices would no more fall than values would .
this act also requires states to develop and implement plans to reduce haze to natural levels by the year 2064 and calls for extensive monitoring of air quality related values ( visibility , flora , fauna , soil , and water ) across the nation .
since the discriminant of quartic is of the 27th degree in the coefficients it follows that there are 27 values of k for which the discriminant vanishes , and hence 27 quartics of the system which have double points .
in the original development concerns were expressed that the greatest fun came less from ' creator ' building values but from the ' destructra brick ' .
these societies place less emphasis on religion , traditional family values and authority .
where the value of each term depends on the values of a pair of other quantities .
once they have a deeper awareness of their individual values , they look at the role of teams and healthy relationships .
it is in the great lusty game he plays with the shallow and the simple that zola ’ s mastery resides , and we see of course that when values are small it takes innumerable items and combinations to make up the sum .
there could be a few more " abouts " and roundings of the values in the foals ' earnings section , but otherwise no problems .
the legal value of private property -- one of those social `` absolute values '' which do not readily lend themselves to the `` marginal process '' -- checks at an early stage many of our well-meant , but badly planned , efforts at justice .
lssi values all forms of life on this earth !
perhaps these are the ideals and values for which we need to renew our subscription .
the nutritional values of greens is supported with secondary sources .
personal and cultural values are relative in that they differ between people , and on a larger scale , between people of different cultures .
historically , in the 18th and 19th centuries , conservatism comprised a set of principles based on concern for established tradition , respect for authority , and religious values .
its material and form and denominations have been modified but the functions of money as a storage of values and as a measure of values and as a medium of exchange remain the same .
as shown in the accompanying diagram , as b approaches 0 the attractor approaches infinity ( note the upswing for very small values of b .
the prohibition reflected the religious values of the document 's roman catholic drafters , but was also supported by senior members of the anglican church of ireland .
status symbols also indicate the cultural values of a society or a subculture .
she becomes engaged in a relationship with a young , promising star ( ahn jae-wook ) a son of a rich businessman who 's against his only son being a singer because it doesn 't uphold to his values of a good occupation a man should be busy with .
the social order renders all ‹utilities› common , provided the exchange of those values which have been appropriated is free .
so that , as aristotle points out in this same connection , laws are symptomatic of the moral values which the group regards as of the highest importance .
he laughs and scoffs at the idea that the horse really thinks , adds , subtracts , multiplies or counts ; that he knows colors ; that he has any idea whatever of tone values , or , indeed , can tell one note from another .
these models were analyzed to determine the values for the various rates which would yield a sustained oscillation .
training and development programmes are carefully designed to enhance performance and to support the core values of the civil service .
agriculture , british , _see_ british agriculture -- state of , in greece , 532 -- and manufactures , comparative values of , 368 .
as a catholic learning community , immaculate heart of mary college-parañaque fosters a nurturing and caring atmosphere where students develop a strong spiritual and academic foundation based on gospel values for effective transformational catholic leaders .
you then combine all the individual images , but instead of simply adding up the grey values for each pixel , you take the median .
at these times , take stock of what you are doing , of how your daily living may be in conflict with your values and attitudes .
the old terms are for the most part founded either on the medicinal values of the plants or on some mythological fancy that accounted for their creation or form .
components and component instances were referenced by 32-bit values that were not pointers .
s of an arbitrary first-order expansion m of a real closed field ( with values in m ) .
i fear that the late mr. dunlop somewhat exaggerated the value of these mines ; for while i was in the country , and in the particular district referred to by the author , no one seemed to have any recollection of any such values having ever been obtained .
so much of the comfort of home depends upon servants that a wise mistress studies them and values their co-operation .
thus , education also contributes to the formation of values in its students through generous recognition of the success and merits legitimate , who , in a remarkable manner , has devoted his life to studying , teaching , the research or public service .
only for them , instead of leading to the liberation of aesthetic goods from practical entanglements and their establishment as the only pure and positive values in life , this analysis has led rather to the denial of all pure and positive goods altogether .
the american oil company ’ s growth has been built on one cardinal principle : honest values , honestly described .
it is your job to cite the reference that verifies the values you present .
[ 8 ] the key to the values of the letters , and thus to the pronunciation of old english , is also to be found in the celtic tongues whence the letters were taken .
some values are provided in table 1 .
all the values of x begin at the 15-th decimal , so excel must take them into account .
the encryption and decryption algorithms are available for peer review , but implementations require the so-called " secret constant " , the values of the substitution box ( s-box ) , which are only available under a license from the 4c entity .
it shows that mark twain was completely ignorant of literary values : had he not wished upon literature , as it were , a separation between the `` head '' and the `` belly '' which , as we shall see , had simply taken place in himself ?
to look upon history as love-infused by a creator who values others as others .
see inglis intelligence quotient values .
the matter and the lines perhaps remain identical , but the values are exactly reversed .
when heat is fed into the system from one direction ( usually below ) , at small values it merely diffuses ( conducts ) from below upward , without causing fluid flow .
we should notice , in the first place , that it is also a scale of values .
the first horses sold there brought 6000 pesos ( equivalent to at least $ 28,000 in present values ) ; and in 1554 alonzo de alvarado offered in vain 10,000 pesos , or $ 29,300 , for an ordinary saddle-horse .
the curve is obtained by plotting current values corresponding to different frequencies , the pressure being kept constant . ]
minutes after treatment gave , for all tissues except bodyfat , much higher values indicating that elimination takes place shortly after injection .
sahya arts and science college through its excellent staff aims to mould the younger generation into qualified and responsible citizens with deep values who can contribute to the progress of the nation .
gerald mast wrote that the comedic aspects overlaid a conflict between masculinity and moralist or feminist values .
the first of august also saw the issuance of the first vatican stamps ( italian stamps were used previously ) , in the " conciliation " definitive series of 15 values .
the absolutely fearless editor who values his opinion more than he values his income , will slam into the public ’ s most cherished notions if he thinks he is right .
he strived to inculcate high moral values among-est his students and family members .
round two was the same as round one , with the point values being doubled and each team 's other three items put into play .
in 1893 seven different values of the existing stamps were overprinted to commemorate the 400th anniversary of introduction of printing into montenegro .
i would hope that the nations of the world might say that we had built a lasting peace , built not on weapons of war but on international policies which reflect our own most precious values .
whatever part man values most , that part will be found to present the greatest amount of difference .
every opportunity for sociability strengthens just so much a natural instinct , increases the sense of social values , and enlarges the sphere of relationships .
this is towards the upper end of various published values over the last few decades .
the dream thus lost its frank wildness , but none of its inherent incongruity : for the sense in which characters and values make a thing what it is , is purely dialectical .
other contemporary machines such as the pdp-11 , and practically all modern architectures , allow for immediate loads , although many such as arm restrict the range of values that can be loaded immediately .
the relative values of gold and silver since 1834 , as given in pixley and abell ’ s ( london ) tables , are trustworthy .
the fur-trading companies settled in kind , values were often measured , not by so many dollars , but by so many pelts .
see huebner , s. s. huebner , s. s. the economics of life insurance ; human life values : their financial organization .
) < /fld > , < cd > the operation of assigning different reasonable values to the arbitrary quantities and interpreting the result. < /cd > < /cs > < i > math .
`` i believe we are really on an island , '' remarked ted , critically appraising the values of some willows and elders which , higher up beyond the pasture fields , seemed to betoken another channel of water .
for ordinary trade in the country , though these same coins are used , different values are assigned to them .
in 1903 , a new set was issued , with values in piastres and shillings .
this scale of values does not refer to light and shade only , but light and shade , colour , and the whole visual impression are considered as one mosaic of masses of different degrees of darkness or lightness .
many values identified during the " cultural heritage " state program constitute the invaluable fund of the national museum of kazakhstan .
find all values of a for which [ \sq ] a is a root of x^2 + x + 20 = 2a , and check your results .
these values are often transmitted or stored in a compressed form .
he tried it out by making diurnal rounds of many saloons , drinking two or three potations in each place , always tendering a circular check of one of the higher values , which he invariably found unchangeable .
when v is constant over the direct surface , while r has different values for different directions of oq , the different points of the inverse surface may be brought to zero potential by placing at o a charge －av .
these aspects have all been changed , as have several of the letters for the values which were retained .
self-esteem values the _real self_ while approbativeness values the _appearances_ of personality .
in the musical scale there is a practical equality of values : one note is as potent as another .
it is meant to imply that if two objects which fulfil very different needs , perhaps , can be interchanged , they can not have very different values .
but it is a grievous error to mistake that superior opulence for a sign of money-hunger , for they actually hold money very lightly , and spend a great deal more of it than any other race of men and with far less thought of values .
he was further motivated by his conviction that lawyers had a special responsibility to maintain and improve society 's institutions in the light of its democratic values .
literacy was appropriate for the transfer of know-how , as it was for the maintenance of family-based values and successive assumption of responsibilities regarding the family , moreover the community .
but as record , it constituted a new experience , with its own inherent values .
a second objection would be raised that in many cases , the values pledged by the borrower could not exist if the lender did not make the loan .
while convenient for many purposes , this approach has the disadvantage of all points ' coordinate values being dependent on the arbitrary placement in the plane .
| values | | | close .
if we may imagine the calculations of a dealer in a rural region , where no common measure of values is used , it will help to make clear the nature of this function .
most materials have poisson 's ratio values ranging between 0 .
end-execthe values given in the send mapset command correspond to the names used on the first dfhmsd macro in the map definition given below for the mapset argument , and the dfhmsi macro for the map argument .
but one can reduce those unarguable values to a minimum by appealing to certain social needs .
the series however discontinued due to poor production values and low trps .
punnu was raised in a conservative and protective environment , with his family trying to inculcate in his traditional indian values instead of western mores .
i am committed to the values of the corps .
bran was able to tell to a penny how much the family purse contained , while haidee as a matter of fact possessed a far finer appreciation of money values than either westenra or val .
the quantitative values for qualitative terms are intended to ensure that confidence levels are interpreted correctly .
they are just forming their judgments as to the values of things about them .
this combination of production values and darker characterisation seemed to work against the series , and the normally loud and broad humour of such ensemble romps was uncomfortable in the surroundings .
after listening to compositions of bach and beethoven , brodsky said : `` he lays everything from a to z before you in the most conscientious way , and through delicacy and sensitiveness of perception he attains a very close and artistic adjustment of values . ''
block parsing is higher level , handling the scanning at the level of rebol values .
the above factorization is not unique , since it depends on the choice of values for λn , and is not especially elegant .
at the opposite extreme would be those economists , as professor davenport and jevons , who find no value for a good except in the minds of individual men , so that there may be as many different values as there are different men .
accumulation =_11,155,827_= surplus , by new york standard , =_2,254,000_= _cash surrender values .
on the new york exchange it was followed by a slump in war industry values .
many americans eat more meat than they require ; more americans are wasteful , and ignorant of food values .
just as much part of the field of economics , according to heertje , are those items difficult or impossible to express in monetary values such as nature , quality of life and sense of well-being .
the approximate london market values of sheep-skins are : -- cape , 10-34_s._ a doz .
[ 513 ] it is obvious that the ratios of opposite whorls , or of radii 180° apart , are represented by the square roots of these values ; and the ratios of whorls or radii 90° apart , by the square roots of these again .
number of cases of various anthropometric data that severally fell in the three classes of large , medium , and small , when certain limiting values were adopted 159 xvii .
there , among the rum-reeking effects of the captain , he discovered the royal charter and warrant under which the vessel sailed , together with the lists of spanish vessels which should have left port , their destinations and probable values .
the physical design of cities and their economic functions are secondary to their relationship to the natural environment and to the spiritual values of human community .
mcallister , a married man who ran on a platform of family values , was caught kissing a volunteer , the wife of one of mcallister 's friends , two months after his election to congress .
dressing schemes and plant for sulphide copper ores are thus often complicated , particularly for the recovery of the values from the finer material , and can not be discussed at any length here .
i also note that angel david strongly values their contributions , which , if this problem were corrected , would be an excellent trait to have .
commodities can only exist as " values " for a seller and " use-values " for a buyer .
code page 437 has a series of international characters , mainly values 128 to 175 ( 80hex to afhex ) .
when he comes to the problem of social value , he carries over the same conception of value , and he finds that social values appear when many individuals , through '' sympathetic participation , '' _feel_ the same value .
unfortunately , the populist values of many prominent wikipedians are generally antithetical to scholarly values , which is a huge part of the problem in attempting to deal with bad content in the scientific categories .
this site [ 6 ] has a table listing the mbtu values of various trees .
this method is probably superior to mine , if the x values are equally spaced .
various pka values are reported , 1 .
a smart script , slick production values and maybe a splash of nostalgia got the remake of hawaii five-o placed on the cbs prime-time lineup this fall , but it will take more than beefcake and a remixed theme song to keep the show on the air .
for example , f could be the σ-algebra σ ( x ) generated by a random variable x , which contains all the information on the values taken by x .
_f_ - _k r_ is to be as near zero as possible for each pair of values of _f_ and _r_ .
the values of q _ i that satisfy this equation are the best responses .
if you 'd been doing your job , you 'd know that matsuo noda had already sold treasury futures far in excess of japan 's portfolio back when values were still high .
mukti-yogyas are jivas or souls who are receptive to spiritual values , and through repeated embodiments they evolve into better and better men , and finally through concentrated spiritual discipline and god 's grace attain salvation .
and thus his genius came upon a method which revealed to him an orderly unfolding in the world with stages of relative values , the higher developing from the lower , and all stages constituting an organic whole .
his scale of values is knocked out of working order by the very first page , almost by the very first sentence .
the ss ideology and values of the organization were one of the main reasons why the ss was entrusted with the execution of many nazi atrocities and war crimes of the nazi state .
all of this tends to stifle business , especially the smaller units , and finally expresses itself in further depression of prices and values , in restriction on new enterprise , and in increased unemployment .
with rising temperature it always strongly diminishes ; on the other hand , at very low temperatures its values are always enormous , and at the absolute zero of temperature may be infinitely great .
the quantum analogs of noether 's theorem involving expectation values , e .
cosmopolitan democracy is a political theory which explores the application of norms and values of democracy at different levels , from global to local .
after being modernized , nations often fall into revolutions due to the change in values , the unity and mobilization of people , and temper , and once the revolution is successful the state can undergo more socioeconomic development .
impressionism has discovered a whole range of new colour values by careful and intelligent study of the influence of light upon colour , and where formerly we saw ten we now find a hundred .
trainers are small files that allow for in game value modification ( such as cheat code ) through altering retail functions in game values by way of using tsr ( terminate and stay resident ) keys .
i think you have great common-sense and appreciation of values .
this kind of progress has a great deal to do with beauty -- at least in its deeper emotional interests , if not in its moral values .
later on , the adaptability of the human animal begins to assert itself ; a new standard of values replaces the old one ; and the _man_—as apart from his chattels—emerges .
scoring is done by adding up the point values of the pairs , triples , or four-of-a-kinds cards .
of course still better results can be expected by taking intermediate values .
he envisioned a unique elementary school linked with the church that would stress academic excellence and traditional values , but also diversity of its student body .
the music of the show was well appreciated with hindu reviewing the music as " lilting and one of the good production values " .
with the maximum load on the motors the volts and amperes of the system have their greatest values , and these values both decline with smaller loads .
they may learn that , from the moment they embark in the company 's canoes at lachine , or in their ships at gravesend , they bid adieu to all that civilized man most values on earth .
in the forefront of these is the problem of interpolation , in which , knowing a certain number of values of a function , we seek to divine the intermediate values .
uml profiles use stereotypes , stereotype attributes ( known as tagged values before uml 2 .
the approximate london market values of deer-skins are : blesbok , cape , 6-17_d._ a lb .
the kindness packs were designed to engage and encourage values and a kind ethos as part of general education and life .
the religious man values what he sees , chiefly as an 'imperfect shadowing forth ' of what he is incapable of seeing . ''
the professor has one or two real art treasures , but nothing that he values quite as much as this fading picture .
those aspects of life which christians and other nihilists reject , belong to an incalculably higher order in the hierarchy of values , than that which the instinct of degeneration calls good , and _may_ call good .
the values for different liquids vary considerably ; and it is also necessary to note that the figure for a given liquid depends upon the nature of the medium by which it is bounded—whether , for example , the surface is in contact with air or another liquid .
such examples require the understanding of and inter-relation with prospective values , retrospective values , and contemporary values .
if such a person feels that his country 's happiness and greatness will not be a satisfying recompense for anything he can do for her , let him , as he values his peace and soul 's health , cling to the safe obscurity of private life .
the code of an invoking function states the name of the invoked , along with the names of variables that hold values to pass to it .
_which values have been paramount hitherto ? _ morality as the leading value in all phases of philosophy ( even with the sceptics ) .
it rewards welfare over work , it undermines family values , it lets millions of parents get away without paying their child support , it keeps a minority -- but a significant minority -- of the people on welfare trapped on it for a very long time .
for , whatever may be our claims or assertions , interest is finally an infallible barometer of the values we assign to our activities .
in their search for new values , or when faced with competing answers to tough questions , people tend to look back to a time when everything seemed all right .
kodak and inspired by the systems of weston film speed ratings and general electric film values , the american standards association ( now named ansi ) defined a new method to determine and specify film speeds of black-and-white negative films in 1943 .
his objective was to promote traditionalist values in the increasingly secular , modern consumer spanish society .
seldom can penetration and courage in thinking hold their own against the miscellaneous habits of discourse ; and nobody remembers that moral values must remain captious , and imaginative life ignoble and dark , so long as the whole basis and application of them is falsely conceived .
it can be approximated from other sigmoidal functions by assigning large values to the weights .
in order to compare mutual information values obtained with partitions of different sizes , the mutual information value is normalized by dividing by the maximum achieveable value for the given partition size .
not only has this been fully acknowledged by outside witnesses in a position to judge , but , what he values more , has won the approbation and confidence of his people .
normal gravity values are easy to compute and " hypothesis-free " , i .
it " might " run faster if were implemented as a lookup of the 256 possible values ( 16 switches of 16 choices each ) instead of the calc method and unfortunate need for duplicate calls to .
presumably , in this case , only parameter names ( or numbers ) are available , and all other parts of the metadata will have their default values .
according to professor james petras , the public perception of carter as " a peace mediator , impartial electoral observer and promoter of democratic values .
retrieved aug 2011 again assuming that the individual being tested does not have any other risk factors that result in that individual having a different pre-test probability than the reference group used to establish the positive and negative predictive values of the test .
one can imagine that there might exist other stable vacuum configurations where the universe effectively has different physical coupling constants and the masses of fundamental particles are very different than their present values .
the difference then is that with variable and wildcard parts , a pattern doesn 't build into a single value , but matches a group of values that are the combination of the concrete elements and the elements that are allowed to vary within the structure of the pattern .
lower values of the series are printed from plates of 400 on single-line watermarked paper , while the one-dollar franklin is printed from plates of 200 subjects and uses double-line watermarked paper of the appropriate size .
_the value of public sentiment and coöperation_ -- rise in values as a town improves ; what an enthusiast can accomplish .
there are definite values to those processes , especially the peer review aspects inherent in them .
the ping times measured are too long for this application , with values of 578ms-589ms " .
but that his daughter , in the flower of her young womanhood , would profit by this larger and more distinguished way of life , gave the said recall its deeper values and its zest .
in the original division -- fair , according to appraised values -- his knowledge of tendencies of growth had put into his wife 's third almost everything that was likely to show a quick increase in price .
this is compared to the other averages that were more than ten times these values .
`` even on the old planet , '' the duchess spoke as a woman very tired , `` one is beginning to contemplate changes in values . ''
marston read little else but poetry ; and of poetic values , especially of the intenser order , his judgment could not be surpassed in sensitiveness .
doubted whether anything could be done in the crowded current session , and the new president of the local government board intimated that personalty must be made to contribute more to local taxation , and that `` socially created '' values might be dealt with by special legislation .
he values it above the costliest pieces of european fabric that he has seen .
on november 2011 , the civil patrons of the church got a stay order from the district court , to stop demolishing the church , citing its architectural values .
it might have been thought that the further course of the decipherment would have presented little difficulty , now that the values of many of the assyrian characters were known , and the close resemblance of the language they concealed to hebrew had been discovered .
the two great rivals london might content , if what he values most to each she sent ; ill was the franchise coupled with the box : give pitt the freedom , and the gold to fox .
i doubt if wikipedia , and the same is probably true about blogspot , can do anything about this issue without sacrificing other values , but the criticism should not be brushed away as sensationalist .
equality between the sexes would amount to little if both men and women were subordinated and misrepresented through english values , culture and institutions .
he learned how shoes that look like six dollar values may be sold for two-fifty .
but the great inconvenience of such small coins led to the striking of corresponding values in bronze , and these “ silver scales , ” for they had just the appearance of such , went out of use .
if _real_ values could be determined , they would necessarily be identical with prices , but as they can not be ascertained in ordinary commodities of trade , prices become the really essential considerations and values the subordinate ones .
the fourth column contains the values of the powers computed by the formula _p_ = 0·0143 _r_ .
it shows how to setup the template as well as what the values are .
as reflected in white universal suffrage at the time of statehood , the early alabama settlers were noted for a spirit of frontier democracy and egalitarianism , and their fierce defense of the republican values of civic virtue and opposition to corruption .
if we can find another pair of values , the thing is done .
islamic law did not permit exchange of unequal values of these articles and by analogy to a variety of their products .
the daughters that result from such a cross give only the amount of crossing-over between eosin and miniature ( as 29.7 ) , but the males give the cross-over values for eosin lethal ( 9.9 ) , lethal miniature ( 15.4 ) , and eosin miniature ( 25.1 ) .
are given some values obtained by fleming for the hysteresis loss in the sample of cast iron , the permeability test of which is recorded in table iv .
they have a gold currency formed in the same manner and of various values ; they have no copper or tin coin : occasionally , some of the latter may be seen brought from calantin , & c. : cowries or bias are used in their stead .
id " values for " personnametype " sub-elements to assign an alternate ordering independent of the physical xml sequence , and an updated frequently asked questions ( faqs ) resource that incorporates content from the global jxdm version 3 .
this is done with a coregistration algorithm that works similar to the motion-correction one , except that here the resolutions are different , and the intensity values cannot be directly compared since the generating signal is different .
as a consequence , developers often use ssl apis incorrectly , misinterpreting and misunderstanding their manifold parameters , options , side effects , and return values .
a few have recognized values as shade trees ; many more are interesting or attractive in the park or on the lawn ; others are never found outside the forest .
it may be remarked that starting from the same value at 5° , for the sake of comparison , rowland 's values of the total heat agree to 1 in 5000 with those calculated from the formulae .
in constructing formal planes with definite tones whose values are mechanical and absolute , the cubists have missed that possible subjectivity of movement which , in its highest degree , colour alone can give .
the club sold two plots of land , the first on 21 june 2002 and the second on 20 february 2003 , for values of 29 .
the first annual report of the postmaster general , for the year ending 5th april , 1852 , contains the following information concerning the new stamps : -- postage stamps for the pre-payment of letters of the respective values of 3d. , 6d .
ensuring the future and the distinctiveness of the jewish people by furthering jewish , hebrew and zionist education , fostering spiritual and cultural values and teaching hebrew as the national language ; 5 .
however , pilots sometimes round off values from charts to a more conservative figure .
the relation between sterling and currency values and their equivalents in the decimal coinage of the united states was fixed by law , and the matter seems important enough to reproduce the statute here .
when the methods are analyzed by which the major and minor clauses are assigned their respective values in these tongues , it is very plain what difficulties of expression the system of incorporation involves .
the black points and jagged line show the set of values being searched , the horizontal black line represents the value to be found , which is not in the set .
for one decade of the life of a modern series that is a great record , and it would be a rash prophet who should venture to predict future values .
and finally , the probate records of the northumberland and lycoming county courts contribute some documentation concerning the material values of these frontier inhabitants .
we think it more than probable that when the b machine was first used both values were perforated by it ; and we therefore pass over the second printing of the one penny , and give 1863 to 1866 as the date which most likely belongs to issue 3 .
the fishing enthusiast knows it only as a paradise of his craft and values it accordingly .
the sensitivity of connectivity estimators , based on granger causality , to the changes of phase was demonstrated in , where it was reported that filters influencing phases disturb connectivity values .
bojo scarcely paid any attention to wall street matters now , but he knew that the movement downward of values had been slow and gradual and that prophecies of dark days were current .
another aspect of existential freedom is that one can change one 's values .
the report is characterized by a feedback-type field whose values may indicate one of abuse , fraud , virus , or other ( more types are registered at iana ) .
text clips are code templates or values that can be inserted into the current document to speed up development time .
in a nutshell , the english speaking people come from a warlike culture that values military prowess .
then `` x is a man implies x is mortal for all values of x '' exactly symbolizes the attitude toward a man subject to a disease supposedly mortal .
the values given in art .
monthly bond values .
few new teachers will find a well planned course awaiting their arrival in a new field , and without previous experience a new teacher is likely to build up a course without due respect to relative values which comes only with a perspective of a course in its entirety .
the bias function assumes the use of the 2-sample variance as a base-case , since any other variants of m may be chosen and values may be transferred via the 2-sample variance to any other variance for of arbitrary m .
typically many games of all kinds use running totals for scoring ; the actual values of past events in the sequence are not important , only the current score , that is to say , the running total .
the experimental values of the coefficient of discharge for a re-entrant mouthpiece are 0.5149 ( borda ) , 0.5547 ( bidone ) , 0.5324 ( weisbach ) , values which differ little from the theoretical value , 0.5 , given above .
kurtz concluded , " marriage , as its ultramodern critics would like to say , is indeed about choosing one 's partner , and about freedom in a society that values freedom .
advisors are having no values .
the exaltation of sex outside of marriage in contemporary society occasioned the cdf to deal with sexual ethics so that we can understand with our own intelligence the values innate in our nature .
the set of all solutions to a 2-satisfiability instance has the structure of a median graph , in which an edge corresponds to the operation of flipping the values of a set of variables that are all constrained to be equal or unequal to each other .
this place has some historical values as well .
the paddle controller reads 0 when turned to its maximum clockwise position , and returns increasing values as it is turned counter-clockwise ending at its maximum value .
one of the greatest values of either cold or hot applications is diminution of the discomfort from the cardiac disturbance , and the stopping of any pain which may be present .
the wiser class of capitalists would , indeed , find means to exchange their credits for more certain values , or make it a condition that they should receive in the end a large sum .
african american christians and white christians have been separated into different political camps in the last generation or so but they share many of the same core values , especially when it comes to social issues like abortion , marriage and school vouchers .
thus a good housekeeper falls into the habits of doing things which were originally a mark of her ability , which she holds as sacred and values above her health and energy .
_fancy-colored_ pearls have peculiar and irregular values , depending a good deal upon rarity and upon the obtaining of a customer for an odd color .
we urge caution , however , in attempting to create time series by stringing together economic data - especially dollar values - from previous editions of the factbook .
it took time and conversation and some acquaintance with values as they obtain at the ecole des beaux arts , and the knowledge of what it meant to be `` selling , '' to lift monsieur vambery to his proper place in her regard .
and all these have not only the values of the loftier and more excellent and priceless kind , but also an actual _money_-value , since it is only when co-operating with or aided or enabled by these , that human labor creates wealth .
after having been face to face with death for two years , a man learns something about the true values of human life .
they should find out , unaided , as much as possible concerning the animal in question : his size , color , food , home , values , etc. , -- the teacher supplementing with interesting and necessary items not at the disposal of the class .
he values physical symmetry because one's first impression of him is apt to be favourable .
it can have more arguments , but the rest must have default values associated with them .
metformin has acid dissociation constant values ( pka ) of 2 .
i may borrow here an apposite illustration from recent papers on the unity of nature by the duke of argyll , which deserve careful study by any one who values common-sense views of this subject .
in the post-febrile period , however , abnormally high values for the eosinophil cells are often found , or even a well-marked eosinophil leucocytosis , which generally attains but moderate degree .
the comparative values given for the different men on page 42 will serve as good guide in most cases .
i stuck to my guns on my morals and values as a human being .
on the second dimension , survival values involve a priority of security over liberty , non-acceptance of homosexuality , abstinence from political action , distrust in outsiders and a weak sense of happiness .
the values are assigned as follows : fingers no .
the transvaluation of all values would mean the exaltation of life rather than the exaltation of suffering , and an acceptance of every instinct or lust as organic and therefore valid , and so beyond the scope of moral condemnation .
the ties of universal humanity he values more than those of national connection .
we want football to be again a means of education and not tied to strictly monetary values " .
on the day the book was officially released , the guardian printed extracts from the book on american values , criticism of barack obama and his health care legislation , criticism of levi johnston and the younger generation .
it appeared in values of 3 , 6 and 30 para , in two series ( 1862 and 1864 ) .
peter lalor of the daily telegraph described it as " another highly-recommended episode , although if you have sensitive christian values perhaps you would be better off missing this episode " .
the principles of method can be grouped under three main headings ; first of all , naturally , the student must possess real scientific aims , and know the values and criteria of modern ethnography .
its value and distribution must therefore be regulated , not by the law of value which obtains in adjacent places , but by that which is applicable to imported commodities—the law of international values .
using older electronics , prfs were generally fixed to a specific value , or might be switched among a limited set of possible values .
this talk about a survival of '' unexpended mythological values '' carried him off his feet .
when you see a man of sense look about for applause , and discover an itching inclination to be commended ; lay traps for a little incense , even from those whose opinion he values in nothing but his own favour ; who is safe against this weakness ?
this world of ideals or values ( 3 ) is that for the sake of which the worlds of phenomena and law ( 1 and 2 ) exist .
english and american among the greatest works in english fiction , `` adam bede '' stands out conspicuous by setting forth the eternal question of moral values .
in a large way , it might be said that statics is concerned with the laws of the equilibration of values , and that dynamics , theory of prosperity , etc. , are concerned with the nature and causes of variations in the values themselves .
at night , the land cools off more quickly than the ocean because of differences in their specific heat values .
the voltage of the current and resistance of the coil are of such values that when a steady current is flowing , the lamp filament is just perceptibly red .
you value it no more than one values the sun and wind .
since the same original variable can be associated to several of the new variables , the values of these new variable must all agree on the value of the old variable .
in studying the cross-over values of reduplicated , only those flies that have abnormal legs are to be used in calculation , as in the case of abnormal abdomen where the phenotypically normal individuals are partly genetically abnormal .
not least because cultural insularity and extremism are products of the failures of wider society to foster a shared sense of belonging and to advance liberal democratic values .
moreover , by the same kind of operation , the dominating objects of past valuations present themselves as standardized values .
lid ) program , designed specifically for schools to promote universal values and teach life skills educate through educational content in the visual medium .
city limits feature contextualised the art values of this practice , material began to be featured in small screenings in official art galleries such as the ica and tate .
our system of values , as it was articulated in the literate use of language , is expressed in our hunger , and in our particular ways to satisfy it .
the only tedious programming tasks were : special case code for values less than 20 , which include 2 and 5 , and exclude 1 and 9 .
the pitch signal , which required greater sensitivity , was encoded by a pair of six-level values ( one coarse , and one fine ) , giving thirty-six levels in all .
it views it as an abusive business masquerading as a religion and believes that it pursues political goals that conflict with the values enshrined in the german constitution .
they try to impose upon a community with vastly different customs and life-styles that are much closer to ancient gaelic ways and are against such false values .
it 's important to note that these linear rgb values are not the final result .
tex ) is used to indicate that two values are proportional .
this whole era witnessed a turning away from the accepted values of society , as the well-organized government of the han era dissolved into political and intellectual confusion .
the other tends to deny tender values to love .
during the 14th to 16th centuries , madhava of sangamagrama and the kerala school of astronomy and mathematics discovered the infinite series for several irrational numbers such as π and certain irrational values of trigonometric functions .
of note , positive and negative predictive values depend on the prevalence of the disorder in the studied population .
these are the values that are being iterated each time through the loop .
in all cases a percentage basis of comparison has been adopted ; arbitrary values are assigned to the several functions of a mixer , such as 40 per cent .
though certain groups like jews , gypsies and basques have maintained their identity through centuries , their values show adaptation to the dominant cultural environment .
poor humanity , so deluded as to the essential values of life , so peculiarly demented in all that concerns property !
good and bad are values which we can only learn to appreciate when we have felt the effect of the phenomenon of morality .
the more precise values are found in the junction list table as the terminal mileposts for segment , and the overall total is found in its more precise form in the infobox .
for the primitive in man is a beast whom it is hard to chain nor does humanism with its semi-scientific , semi-sentimental laudation of all natural values produce that exacting mood of inward scrutiny in which self-control has most chance of succeeding .
which is better might depend on one 's values ( or you could measure by life-expectancy , incidence of diabetes , etc .
taking it to be a unit vector , all possible values of the hidden variable are represented by all points on the surface of a unit sphere .
various values have in the past been confused together , scientific , materialistic , hedonistic , moral , aesthetic .
whose values set and direct on this stage of life ?
we may probably take the tabulated values as showing correctly the rate of variation between 110° and 190° c. , but the values in terms of any particular thermal unit must remain uncertain to at least 0.5 % owing to the uncertainties of the thermometry .
the result had been that not only was he familiar with the facts in all their bearings , but he had already so far differentiated them that he was able to arrange them in his own mind according to their values .
what misery and disappointment have resulted from inflated values !
logically , then , to get " the " predictive probability , we should average all of the various predictive probabilities over the different possible parameter values , weighting them according to how strongly we believe in them .
in a number of ways , leithen resembles buchan himself , moving amongst high society , and espousing conservative values .
prawdą , pracą , walką , which translates into english as " with truth , with work , with struggle " , a motto by which christian values are to be brought into life .
for all other values it is a spiral from pole to pole on the globe intersecting all meridians at the same angle , and is thus not a great circle .
there can not be two functions with the given perimeter values , since their difference would be a monogenic potential function with boundary value zero , which can easily be shown to be everywhere zero .
the war has made our scale of values very primitive ...
astrid lindgren not only depicts a village with a special charm , but she also creates a perfect children 's world ; it touches the reader especially by its simplicity which holds the deep wisdom of true human values and a great amount of fine humour .
approximate values for some common nuclei are given in the table below .
he sees " cultural standards and moral values " as " at stake " due to new media innovations .
more than one of his descriptive passages , however , give us those glimpses of conditions past and gone , which the historian values .
substituting the given values in the formula on page 758 : 10 × 746 × 200 × 21.6 circular mils = ————————————————————- = 36,991 .
for many people -- depending on their inclinations , values , and sympathies -- traditional religious guidance may provide much that is as yet not to be found in the more scientific and systematic schools of contemporary therapy .
it is not merely a system of æsthetics that occupies the pages under this section , for nietzsche never divorces art from life itself ; and the artist , according to him , is the superior type , the creator of values .
the trouble is that no definite line can be drawn , no scale of moral values can decide where flirting ends and serious attentions begin ; and society never agrees as to what is innocent and what reprehensible .
social health means the same as social order , and is guaranteed when nearly everyone accepts the general moral values of their society .
west listed " stations " , viewpoints where tourists could enjoy the best views of the landscape , being encouraged to appreciated the formal qualities of the landscape and to apply aesthetic values .
the second step changes the values for one variable ( all other inputs remaining at their start values ) and calculates the resulting change in model outcome compared to the first run .
in the 1 , 6 , 10 , 30 and 90 cents these small disks are shaded by vertical lines , in the other values by diagonal lines , and the letters are filled with horizontal lines .
these conditions should not be lost sight of during the readjustment of values in this part of the world .
no one values what you did , shalom .
by convention , triplet values are represented by their ordered digits .
this germany is the community of those who are solemnly bound together and who experience and realize these eternal national values .
we know that he was always chafing against the scheme of values , the whole social régime , that was represented by his wife and his friends .
each year , he travels in a different direction and meets different people from distant cultures , and each time , he comes into the possession of a magical object , but the fisherman values love greater than everything the soul tried to tempt him with .
b as a function of the temperature for different values of the system size l .
`` i was counting on your interest , for he values your good opinion more i think than that of anyone in the world . ''
_iii. -- eugenic qualities of primary importance_ the following is offered as a contribution to the art of justly appraising the eugenic values of different qualities .
his first research focus was automatic perimetry for which he established normal values ; in numerous laboratory studies , he contributed to the understanding of the role of endothelin and nitric oxide in ocular perfusion .
although the pictures here display careful drawing and elaborate composition , the excellence of the general result is certainly due to the fact that the artist thought fully as much of colour values as he did of his designs , something his contemporaries were prone to forget .
one of these websites was owned by one of the richer habbos vodor , but after his habbo and fansite were hacked he gave up habbo even when people were speculating that it would become the place to find super rare values .
the data are derived from the values of the declination given in the geodetic survey 's _report_ for 1906 , appendix 4 , and _magnetic tables and magnetic charts_ by l. a. bauer , 1908 .
national park and monuments casa grande ruins national monument , one of more than 280 areas administered by the national park service , united states department of the interior , was set aside because of its outstanding archeological values .
the nature of interest : interest a selective agent -- interest supplies a subjective scale of values -- interest dynamic -- habit antagonistic to interest .
union type ] ] s are types describing values that belong to " either " of two types .
iec 10646 , plus a set of default values for some of these items .
it has one general market where values are fixed .
islamic law in aceh , they said , would not provide for strict enforcement of fiqh or hudud , but rather would codify traditional acehnese islamic practice and values such as discipline , honesty , and proper behavior .
his work , at a moment of change in construction practices , combined the values of the beaux-arts tradition with the elements of reason , resulting in practical designs adapted to the mechanics of modern life , with his own individual way of understanding the building of the city .
see page 65 for scoring values when hands are played with a limit .
some antifeminists have argued that feminism has resulted in changes to society 's previous norms relating to sexuality , which they see as detrimental to traditional values or conservative religious beliefs .
other signs with definite values in several glyphs are _yax_ , _tun_ , _zac_ , etc .
spatial planning as an institutionalized activity varies from country to country depending on political and economic system , levels of development and social values and institutions , from which take place different objectives , methods of plans elaboration and implementation and planning position .
as the values for the atomic weights gradually became more exact , speculations arose as to the significance of the numerical relations which were observed to exist among them .
public organisations seeking to use public value as a principle need to create a corporate culture in which the pursuit of public values by employees is rewarded just as pursuing shareholder value is rewarded in private corporations .
words were said about line and values and composition , lots of words , such as are always being said .
great was the depreciation in the market price of goldfield mining issues , but not to an extent as yet that indicated the almost complete annihilation of values which followed .
a number of special agents were appointed , who made an exhaustive study of the transfers and assessed values throughout the state .
a common fundamental assumption of many specification approaches is that programs are modelled as algebraic or model-theoretic structures that include a collection of sets of data values together with functions over those sets .
the singular values ( in σ ) are the square roots of the eigenvalues of the matrix xtx .
at a slight advance on face values .
for a prospective uneven exchange , the values of the pieces are often the deciding factor .
god 's name , and of the humanitarian values of seva , selfless service to fellow men , love and tolerance .
a perfect constant bicluster is a matrix ( i , j ) where all values a ( i , j ) are equal to μ .
imagination applied to the practical matters of daily living is nothing more than the ability to project one 's own personality beneath the skin of another , to look around at the world through that other person 's eyes and to realize what values the world holds for him .
a key challenge for the regulator is how to ensure its policies keep in-step with community values to bring about community-led content standards , whilst providing an excellent level of customer responsiveness to customers .
the relative values of two or more `` flush '' hands depend upon the value of the cards they comprise , -- the highest card taking precedence .
the second weakness is that the universe of checksum values is small , being equal to the chosen modulus .
the sukumar ray years established " sandesh " as a unique magazine that combined literary values with humour and fun and a lot of information from different parts of the world .
overton , this novel focuses on a young man named ernest who enters the ministry , prison and a bigamous marriage before becoming a successful writer of essays criticizing victorian values .
high on the governor 's list of changes was a revision to the territorial property tax system that utilized low assessed values combined with high tax rates .
food values of the different vegetables .
he thoroughly understands property values and has handled business interests of importance in this line .
if all the world were his , he could be no other than he is , no whit gladder of himself , no whit higher in his carriage , because he knows contentment lies not in the things he hath , but in the mind that values them .
although many countries in the region do not impose formal ceilings , some still request that tar and nicotine yield values be indicated on the pack ( india , indonesia , japan ) .
the choice of rules or directions has been determined chiefly by the playing values previously alluded to , those directions having been selected which experience has shown to make the most interesting game .
as an integral part of singapore 's educational system , damai has planned for suitable cca programmes to teach pupils skills , inculcate in them the correct values and desirable social attitudes , and provide for healthy recreation .
for a constant-current supply , the above equation uses currents instead of voltages , and the maximum and minimum load values are when the largest and smallest specified voltage across the load are produced .
the mean specific heat , over any range of temperature , may be obtained by integrating the formulae between the limits required , or by taking the difference of the corresponding values of the total heat h , and dividing by the range of temperature .
the confusion has arisen as a result of trying to research a good value for an overcast day ; i tried using google for that and encountered wildly varying values with some surprising implications .
when i drag down the column , all the values get incremented ( i .
influenced by the doctrine of confucius and mencius ( the basic doctrine in china ) , it has become a place endowed with fine values , from which students cultivate good character .
the 309th military intelligence battalion conducts initial entry , collective , and functional training to produce competent , disciplined , and physically fit military intelligence warriors , instilled with the army values , ready to join the army at war .
anders fogh rasmussen , nato secretary general , said that the church 's plans would violate nato 's values and might have a negative impact on the security of its soldiers .
i shall not be so cheap to myself if i see that another values me .
teaching housewives food values .
as the descendant of the academic and well known writer bedri dedja , edlira for nearly 30 years has shared the best albanian values and improved the best and beautiful image of her country albania in french-speaking countries and all european countries .
this era has been marked as a way to examine and provide a way of discussing everyday arguments and was brought about as a reinterest in rhetorical studies for discerning and revealing the human motivations and values that structured arguments , which science was unable to address .
the brand never recovered from the damage inflicted during the beta recall , and combined with a range of related factors , including poor residual values which made their range uncompetitive , decided to withdraw from the right hand drive market .
in city life , at any advanced stage of development , it is impossible to exist without a common measure of values .
grondona , harrison and lindsay all feel that without development orientated values and mindsets , nations will find it difficult if not impossible to develop efficiently , and that some sort of cultural change will be needed in these nations in order to reduce poverty .
[ side note : _arrangement of the values_ ] next scheme out the values .
group play , by which is meant the division of a large number of players into smaller squads or groups , is undoubtedly the best method for getting the best sport and the greatest playing values out of most games .
founded on catholic values , quincy notre dame high school educates lifelong learners for lives of service .
however , at the end of this redeal , the point values lost and gained are doubled .
one current website called " go bike boulder " goes a step farther with route planning and analysis , by rating several good bike system values like pavement type , grade values , etc .
sinologist thomas rieger notes issues of a chinese national identity , pointing to gie as a young man " excelling in all confucianist values " , leaving his comfortable job rather than promote an apologetic attitude towards the dutch colonial government to the detriment of his ethnic chinese peers .
southampton is a sleeping giant , a family-supported club with traditional values , and we see the value in taking the brand global .
every year the house council members are elected through a thorough analysis of the students academic record , personality and other values .
for the depreciation of his curfew stock only shows the immense values of the humanity stock .
instead of becoming agrarian capitalists , farmers held onto preindustrial capitalist values emphasizing family and community .
values of a ( n , m ) can be calculated " by hand " for small values of n and m .
i have asked you to imagine this picture of whistler ’ s because it illustrates the first meaning of “ values ” -- namely the different quantities of light that may be contained in one and the same color .
the network 's stated purpose is " to promote the voice of its members within the local government association and the values and interests of the english counties " .
mib is described as " a blend of malay language , culture and malay customs , the teaching of islamic laws and values and the monarchy system which must be esteemed and practiced by all " .
a conviction of this kind must fundamentally alter the position of the spiritual life , as well as its magnitudes and values : and this conviction is no mere theory , but desires and strives to take possession of the whole of existence and to change its form completely .
the values above are expressed as equilibrium dissociation constants .
for the present the values determined by boys and braun may be accepted as having the greatest weight and we therefore take _mean density of the earth_ [ delta ] = 5.527 _constant of gravitation_ g = 6.658 × 10^-8 .
according to label head carlton james ( ed nelson ) , the pages represent good , ol ' fashioned , wholesome family values .
this subtemplate of displays area values .
in auckland , children " lead new zealand 's first " walk for values " up queen st .
while the kinds of human speech fall into groups , and sub-groups , and sub-sub-groups ; yet the groups are not equal to one another in value , nor have the sub-groups equal values , nor the sub-sub-groups .
titchmarsh 's theorema theorem due to edward charles titchmarsh makes precise the relationship between the boundary values of holomorphic functions in the upper half-plane and the hilbert transform .
since no temporal information is available prior to the second frame , vibe populates the pixel models with values found in the spatial neighborhood of each pixel ; more precisely , it initializes the background model with values taken randomly in each pixel neighborhood of the first frame .
while operating from a traditional jewish philosophy machon shlomo claims to distinguish itself with an emphasis on blending realities of the modern professional environment with torah values .
the values are very near to those given in the last experiment , and confirm the conclusions there drawn .
ying mang ( mount holyoke college ) would argue that this story is a detachment from confucian values and openly disregards the popular beliefs that determine success and a respectable social life .
pendle hill has fairly steadily real-estate values that can be seen reflected in most suburbs in the parramatta region .
teaching conservative , christian values in a secular world .
the philosopher , however , as nietzsche understood him , is a man who creates new values , and thus leads mankind in a new direction .
critique._ ] we have thus also solved the question ( so much discussed in our day ) as to the _criterion of value_ in history , and whether judgments of values , as well as judgments of fact belong to the province of the historian .
to answer the actual question , the css property is " direction " and can take values of " ltr " or " rtl " .
the things that he thus values are his ideals , goals to be reached .
for the students and journalists of the 21st century , bill woo 's platform is a reminder of the values worth preserving .
the point values for each event are hidden from the campers , but increase in value from the freshman to senior division .
reduction of peak shock forces also contributes to softer recoil for the shooter , although these " felt recoil " values are much more subjective .
the set of 3 values in a row or column within a block .
muscle being the first consideration in building up a strong body , we need first to find out the values of different foods as flesh-formers , healthy flesh being muscle in its most perfect condition .
these are the extreme values for normal averages , although dwarfs only fifteen inches high have been known , while `` giants '' sometimes occur with a height of nine feet and five inches .
criterion c , distinctive type , period , method of construction and high artistic values found in the 1933 hangar .
a new rating system was wanted , which should rate property on its real value and not discourage improvement ; and high authorities had approved the rating of site values , notably lord rosebery and mr. chamberlain .
two of the important topics will be _some values of negro history_ and _the negro in the world war_ .
ansi pole species by treatment group and corresponding fiber stress and taper values .
i would also support adding some larger values to the non-default options .
however , as the algorithm already ensured the buffer only contains unique values , sorting the contents of the buffer is sufficient to restore their original stable order .
so that w = 6 ( y / 7 ) _r + 3 ( ( 11 y + 3 ) / 30 ) _r ( rejecting sevens ) , the values of which obviously circulate in a period of 7 times 30 or 210 years .
estimation at its core involves analyzing data to obtain a point estimate ( an effect size calculated from data used as estimate of the population effect size ) and an interval estimate that summarizes a range of likely values of the underlying population effect .
food values and the outgoing cargo of fur are the topics of conversation .
pan-africanism as an ethical system traces its origins from ancient times , and promotes values that are the product of the african civilization and the struggles against slavery , racism , colonialism , and neo-colonialism .
the values of realestate dropped , houses were sold for a song , officebuildings for an aria , hotels for a chorus .
for five years past values for all crude drugs have advanced in many instances beyond a proportionate advance in the cost of labor , and they bid fair to maintain such a position permanently .
through its educational , cultural , and informative programs broadcast nationally and internationally , radio tirana has played a major role in the transmission of albanian people 's cultural values .
they were found on good and on poor soils , on good and poor sites , in soils of a wide range of ph values from very acid to alkaline in reaction .
another question regarding the values of atomic weights was raised very soon after their first establishment .
even , however , after the nineteenth century had opened , no sudden rise in art values took place .
yet one is forced to observe that the precincts of satan retain their land values equal to any other locality .
above equations ( 7-9 ) not only shows linear relation of mixture fraction with mass fraction of oxygen and products but also helps in predicting their values .
point of inquiry is the radio show and flagship podcast of the center for inquiry , " a think tank promoting science , reason , and secular values in public policy and at the grass roots " .
table 77 hydraulic values of settling particles in millimeters per second ───────────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────────── diameter in mm .
these values exceed the performance of many other cancer risk prediction tools .
some day we shall see these things in their own surprising values and fresco our village libraries with them . ''
as a witness to contrary values his testimony must be discounted .
most universal life policies come with an option to withdraw cash values rather than take a loan .
but reporting asset values on financial statements at fair values gives managers ample opportunity to slant asset values upward to artificially increase profits and their stock prices .
so , the values above are therefore hard caps , with reduction permitted ( and preferred ) .
man does not make values any more than he makes reality . '
both empires have forgotten spiritual and philosophical values , and are driven largely by greed .
this system of rewarding labor has a far-reaching effect in our political economy , and is a complete uniformity with the general tendency of our efforts to promote steady values .
the function must then have singularities for finite values of z .
each time we move the slider we get a new pair of values for volts and amperes .
then , when it is safe to assume that the time to live values have caused the caching of old keys to have passed , these new keys can be used .
`` trouble with guy is that he has no sense of values .
the protagonist , mike hammer , feels alienated from mainstream society whose values , he feels , are no match for the evil that he must deal with .
our views of life and the values we set on its attainments are largely a matter of imitation .
noise functions for use in computer graphics typically produce values in the range [ -1 .
blood flow physics are determined by certain formulas which can be used to find specific values .
i want to search csv files for values .
signed decimal values may be represented in several ways .
[ sidenote : interest is the equalizer of time values ] 3 .
they said i would drag them into war , that i would disturb values , that the business interests of the country would suffer .
whaling ship captain bering joy ( lionel barrymore ) takes his grandson jed ( dean stockwell ) on a whaling expedition in order to teach the young boy real life values such as honesty , courage , wisdom , fairness and hard work .
in order to fulfill its solemn obligation to help its members reach the highest standards of educational attainment , moral values , and social responsibility , delta sigma phi fraternity has adopted the following code of conduct for the daily lives of each of our members .
it simply values it , so far as it is evidently god 's means , and no further .
in addition , urban control values ( i .
they are mentioned purely to illustrate the underlying , unspoken difference in essential values .
should there be a single tax levied on land values ?
we must envisage a genuine scale of values , and possess a model of genuine excellence toward which to strive .
if , in the name of fighting terrorism , we sacrifice these values for the sake of security , we lose our character , our identity , the very essence of a free and democratic society .
minerals which are not now ores -- according to the accepted , scientific definition , because the values can not be recovered at a profit -- will , at some future period , become ores .
mr. cunninghame graham is one of the great travel writers , and ranks with borrow and ford , but he is more impartially interested in character than either borrow or ford , and has a far more vivid feeling for the spiritual values of landscape .
some critics of environmentally adjusted aggregates , including gdp , point out that it may be difficult to assign values to some of the outputs that are quantified .
needs attention ) the bot munges the values down to those 7 states .
all of the band members believe that they hold , all the values that they practice and all the air that they breathe are from this mirpur .
the housing ( slum clearance compensation ) act 1965 continued a provision for home owners of unfit dwellings purchased between 1939 and 1955 to be compensated at market values .
and even there , values are often estimated without actual exchange , and the art of accountancy has arisen for that purpose .
by sylvester 's law of inertia , the number of values of each of these three cases is independent of the choice of orthogonal basis .
he likewise built a church , which was dedicated to the _visitation of our lady_ ; and coined money of different values and denominations , which was ordered to pass current by proclamation , and some of which he caused to be scattered among the populace .
a point-trick game is a trick-taking game in which cards have individual scoring values .
all at once , and without warning , orders fall off , values begin to drop , business collapses , factories are shut down , and millions of men are thrown out of jobs .
in a 1959 article in harper 's magazine , he summarily rejected all religious values and practice , especially the liberal protestantism of continental europe that began with schleiermacher and culminated in the writings of paul tillich and rudolf bultmann .
security assistance promotes regional stability , deters aggression , maintains alliances , and disseminates democratic values between the united states and its allies .
iq values for historical figures cannot possibly serve as a neutral inclusion criterion ) .
udp-lite uses the same set of port number values assigned by the iana for use by udp .
he says values are bound to go up as the new railroads are built , and marston had a good deal of land .
on page 42 the curve value 3-1/2° was changed to 3° 30 ' to match the other similar values .
perhaps this raillery is pursued too far , yet it is turn 'd upon a very obvious remark , that woman 's strongest passion is for her own beauty , and that she values it as her favourite distinction .
futurity enters into the values of all goods which are not destined for immediate consumption -- capital values of long-time goods are discounted present worths of _future_ values .
further , if we look at these payments for wounds carefully , it becomes clear that they can not be _gold_ values .
in colonial times politics and law were closely intertwined meaning that if individuals did not follow the same religion and thus , the same values and morals , governance could become difficult .
yet both the home and the church can give something which is nowhere else obtainable by us , and represent values which it is perilous to ignore .
in the novel broch explains the decline of values beginning with joachim 's hesitation between a lower-class mistress and a noble fiancée .
asian values " was also evident in the planning of the handover of hong kong to china in 1997 .
the measurement of these values will give an idea about the water quality of the water body being studied .
rips complexes for different values of δ .
patients learn to identify their own core values and direct themselves in behaviors that align with their value systems , while limiting behaviors that do not .
this being inconvenient for comparison with sun-spots , use was made of his monthly values to obtain corresponding data for years commencing with january .
in this way , the truth value of the compound sentence is defined as a certain truth function of the truth values of the simpler sentences .
presumably it would be possible to calculate the terminal velocity of a ship falling through sea-water if one knew the values of the relevant parameters .
additionally , each periodic cell is designed with specific parameters and values by which it interacts with the radiated field at optical frequencies .
if a tax must be levied on income , so be it ; but income is not a thing to be presumed under any circumstances , still less when the state , by its own deed , has made a violent change on the relation and values of property .
but behind this relativity , this scheme of relations between values , there lie two values which are absolute .
as long ago as 1893 , when huxley wrote his romanes lecture on _evolution and ethics_ , this identity of natural and human values was explicitly denied .
it has the advantage of working also for complex-valued random variables or for random variables taking values in any measurable space ( which includes topological spaces endowed by appropriate σ-algebras ) .
beyond this we can not proceed with certainty , though the values for the missing parts suggested below are probably those recorded on the lost fragments of the monument .
forests also provide some non-market values which have no current market price .
both values are evidently too low .
these values manifest themselves in all of the movement 's programs for youth and adults , as well as in the members ' own culture and lifestyle .
in the world of finance , -- and this is the lowest in the scale of real values , -- is not that fragile but mighty factor we call credit based on public opinion ?
dr kiran 's philosophydr kiran 's vision for asha is grounded in values of respect for all and visions of peace between individuals and among communities .
the simulation engine then evolves the system forward through time , reading values from the nodes , applying formulas , and writing them back out .
the ordinary pantheism of co-existence of phenomena is transformed into a succession of stages of values , and all make up a harmony of more or less distinct copies of god .
color -- values -- subtlety 160 xv .
in many of the codes different values are assigned to different classes of people , as here in title xli .
similarly , cloud shadows in areas that appear clear can affect ndvi values and lead to misinterpretations .
a minimum of n values are calculated evenly spaced along the range of the desired calculations .
time ( utc ) path length max width damageall monetary values are in 2012 united states dollars unless otherwise stated .
the first four starting values for h0 through h3 are the same with the md5 algorithm , and the fifth ( for h4 ) is similar .
mr. rosenblum himself would be astonished to hear that any one was drawing morals from his manner of conducting his little store , and yet it is from men like him that i learn the true values of things .
unlike with superconductors , these persistent currents do not appear at zero magnetic field , as the current fluctuates symmetrically between positive and negative values ; the magnetic field breaks that symmetry and allows a nonzero average current .
gscs uses gospel values with religion as the core of its curriculum to develop academic competence among its students as well as to deepen their spiritual values .
sammarinese government maintained that the reaffirmation of traditional values represented by the taking of the oath was necessary in order to maintain public order .
as the original footage was shot several years earlier , the differences in costumes and production values are rather obvious .
doseon is remembered with such honor because of his genius in adapting the chinese feng-shui theories into korea 's , very different , land and climate conditions , while placing emphasis on larger values , thus creating korea 's own unique form , " pungsu-jiri-seol " .
to anyone without a nice sense for spiritual values , everything is merely a matter of price , and elderkin 's fee for the loss of his ship and with her his soul was higher than the partners could have wished .
but let a nietzsche , though his life be that of an ascetic , openly challenge and repudiate the values of popular morality , and his name is anathema .
his work eschews normal artist 's materials , instead using everything from rabbit fur to human excrement in order to " tap mythological sources and to realize authentic and universal values " .
he shows that this assumption gives values of carnot 's function which agree fairly well with those calculated by clapeyron and thomson , and that it leads to values of the mechanical equivalent not differing greatly from those of joule .
it has been good to be here in the presence of high courage and to have learned a little in our youth of the values of life and death .
the code values differ per subcarrier and per user .
there are but two alternatives : either there is an object `` in itself '' of thought `` in itself , '' or else there are a series of values which vary with the varying functions to which they belong .
she lures the leftist intellectual into the cosy situation whereby they preach socialist values whilst essentially living the same bourgeois middle class lifestyle , identifying with the proletariat in words only .
[ 60 ] i : trade all exchange , the physiocrats thought , was unproductive , for by definition it implies a transfer of equal values .
the parameters α and β are determined by the particular values of the circuit components .
also , neighbors may be hostile because they fear negative impacts on their property values .
square roots , whose values can not be expressed exactly as fractions .
it 's very interesting monument architecture wise , because it presents a rare sample of sacral architecture that will serve for studying , as tourism attraction , but also as a religious building encumbered with many tangible and spiritual heritage values .
senor sagasta replied : `` i thank you for your explanation and value your frankness , i wish to assure you that the government recognizes your services and values them as they deserve , but it thinks a change of policy .
each page a composition in two values . ]
life tables are mostly used for determining fair values for pension schemes and life insurance policies , and people doing such calculations would have exactly the same requirements from their data as people wanting to work out a fair retirement age .
the story aims to capture the struggle between traditional family values and the modern value of individualism .
to translate the gold values at the old ratio into the new silver solidi : that is , to treble the gold figures of the ancient customary wergelds and make them payable in silver solidi .
what values must be given to a and b , so that ( 3a + 2b + 17 ) /2 , ( 2a - 3b + 25 ) /3 , 4 - 5a - 13b may be equal ?
_ná_ : daḳḳu has three values for _abnu_ , “ stone ” , _za_ , _⋅i_ and _ná_ .
one imitates only that which one values .
the values given in table ix indicate relative weights and powers required by various systems to provide the gaseous environment for manned space cabins .
emerson values mundane circumspection as highly as franklin , and gives to manners and rules of daily behaviour an importance that might have satisfied chesterfield .
if they were originally chosen by an author writing in full sympathetic understanding of his figures , they will , properly spoken , reveal unexpected emotional values .
when countervailing tendencies are unavailable or exhausted , the system requires the destruction of capital values in order to return to profitability .
digitization ( of radiographs ) is the conversion of landmarks on a radiograph or tracing to numerical values on a two- ( or three- ) dimensional coordinate system , usually for the purpose of computerized cephalometric analysis .
monochrome transmissionthe transmission of a signal wave which represents the brightness values in the picture , but not the color ( chrominance ) values .
make a wash-drawing of any cooking-bowl which shows light and dark values .
only certain ranges of values for r1 , r2 , and l produce stable resonators in which periodic refocussing of the intracavity beam is produced .
it follows that if all these aggregate values are to be stored , the amount of space required is proportional to the product of the depth of all aggregating dimensions .
the company also values post-modernism and the great surrealists , blending classic stories into a new theatre of the absurd , which maintains a cohesive , evocative story .
he was devoted to christian values yet his conquests of scotland and ireland were brutal .
gives the mean values of a± and q found at various places .
with the right choice of component values it is possible to produce any of the classic frequency responses .
pluralists also believe that there is no one particular issue or point in time at which any group must assert itself to stay true to its own expressed values , but rather that there are a variety of issues and points at which this is possible .
since the test is done over the residual term rather than raw data , it is not possible to use standard t-distribution to provide critical values .
this mad race to outdo one another and this hunting after pleasures which tickle the senses have benumbed the social mind and have inhibited in it the feeling for deeper values .
not only should they discourage programming harmful to families , but they should strive to incorporate family values in the development of new shows .
baldwin campaign publicly spoke out against abortion , and emphasized the bible , traditional family values , and the need for constitutionally limited government .
with these values calculated for assumed atmospheric temperature and pressure ( 24 ) becomes d = kh .
one of their objectives could be to develop a play containing the values friendship or current media situation .
there is a high degree of dissent amongst brotherhood leaders who do not share the same values therefore undermining its acceptance and commitment to democracy ( rummam ) .
he views the human pursuit of progress as a blind spot in the human psyche that would necessarily kill off the species with the development of superintelligence unless the values of the flesh are preserved above those of the intellect .
the true reading is ia , ea , usually translated “ house , ” “ water-house ” ; this is a popular interpretation which appears to have occurred to the chaldaeans from the values of the signs entering into the name of the god .
`` it is a strange computation of values . ''
2= = ( showing the values and inner meanings of the english alphabet ) = [ illustration : chart of the alphabet ] [ sidenote : the mystic luma ] = ( the 7 space ) = [ illustration : 7 ] = -- n -- =title , subconscious .
these hidden values are why even pokémon that seem identical and have been raised the same way still may have different stats .
so we can use n trits or n log23 bits to encode the tree shape plus mn to encode the values .
in the uncertainty of greenback values , the importer must _insure himself_ in his prices to-day against a possible further depreciation next week , or next month .
in such circumstances , scottish identity can be portrayed as protecting scottish values through an autonomy from england .
under a socialistic régime , where the laborer would get the full product of his labor , or where the whole system of ownership , and consequently the system of distribution , would lapse , values would reach a true expression , if any .
the moment of inertia of an arbitrarily shaped body is the sum of the values for all of the elements of mass in the body .
eric liu and nick hanauer wanted tpn to bring people more in line with the progressive patriotic values they set forth in their book .
the main objective of the studio - preparation and broadcast on channel 1 of the uzbek tv science and art of popular films and programs for the general public , based on national and religious values .
he defends with the utmost vigour the medicinal values of antimony , and criticises in terms far from mild the physicians of his day .
[ 8 ] his history was that of many other restless young chinese intellectuals , struggling for education amidst turmoil , and adjusting their sense of values to the chaotic early republic .
it has been usual to consider barrett as the originator in england of the method of calculating the values of annuities by means of a commutation table , and this method is accordingly sometimes called barrett 's method .
the social compatibility of it systems references the ability of it systems to support basic human values and rights .
there are other values however , immediate or potential .
i had learned to look more closely at life as it was lived , to recognize that there were such things as facts in the world , to emerge from the realm of mind and idea and to place certain values on the concrete and objective phases of existence .
poulet 's criticism of consciousnesslike other geneva school critics , poulet rejects the concept of literary criticism as an objective evaluation of structural or aesthetic values .
this is in corroboration with the ro values that suggest thermogenic production of methane in the zonguldak basin would have been high .
the fluctuation of values in response to sentiment , both inherent and stimulated , manifested itself in a practice of certain real estate dealers on the south side .
we must effect a saving somehow ; there is too great a variation between theoretical and actual values . ''
this provides a springboard for parents to communicate their values as well as helping teens challenge their own beliefs .
the experimental values of both thermal conductivity and diffusivity have shown a better heat transport for the composite filled with large particles .
relative values of chinese and greek in mental and moral training , 109-119 .
on october 1900 , another issue was launched but that time for common usage , the values are in lepta and drachm .
by the time of his premature departure from the university in 1993 due to ill health , he had established an enduring legacy based on the values of friendship , respect and knowledge .
namira studied accounting at the university of alexandria as he took bakly 's advice ; to earn a large enough independent income to pursue his musical career without fear that he would have to one day choose between earning a living and compromising his values .
usually there are several cheap stamps in every issue , and they illustrate the set quite as well as if they were rare varieties or high values .
it enters into our prospects of development , our investment values and our insurance rates .
hkey current user ( hkcu ) - this is the key with installed software settings and os predefined values .
the global elements of the subobject classifier ω of an elementary topos form a heyting algebra ; it is the heyting algebra of truth values of the intuitionistic higher-order logic induced by the topos .
they did not publish them as they found them however , but edited them in accordance with their own values .
average values for fev1 in healthy people depend mainly on sex and age , according to the diagram at left .
chapter lxviii the problem of the land ( discusses the land values tax as a means of social readjustment , and compares it with other programs . )
i knew wikipedia had strayed from its core values over the past few years but i had no idea just how far .
these rights and values he never intended to surrender , and until he was strong and independent enough to secure them to himself , he did not care to expose his gentler will to the machinations of the great scoundrel who had thrived upon his unrewarded genius .
4 , these divisions will represent the positions occupied by the puncture or dot in representing the various suits and values .
united states dollar values obtained through historic conversion rates and the consumer price index .
expression defined , 192 _et seq._ of feeling in another , 202 , 203. of practical values , 208 _et seq._ expressiveness , use of the word , 197 .
too low values are often obtained at the first examination , the patient 's dread of the introduction of the tube probably inhibiting secretion .
connectivity , values ranged between 0 .
there is no perfect balance between present use and future good , between individual and social values , between desires or needs and functions .
he fattened them for the market , translating corn into beef and he was well aware of the values of pork in the economy of such a farm .
luckily , too , the property is in england and america and holland , where values stand more steadily than they do in france. ” aimee remembers the “ sword of honor , ” given by king louis for that victory over the _serapis_ .
the next world ’ s fair will have several new values .
some years ago i expressed the opinion [ 173 ] that the physiological values of the sperm-cell and of the egg-cell must be identical ; that they stand in the ratio of 1 : 1 .
in one of its aspects it is a self which has come to miss ( and therefore to image for itself ) the values and , it may be , a certain dawning sense of vitality and growth which obedience to authority once afforded .
while still retaining some aspects of its military origins , the michigan state university spartan marching band lives on in the modern form established by falcone , with most of its cherished traditions and values deriving from his 1927 to 1967 tenure .
history may tell us what men did , but only the poet or other artist can make us relive the values of their experience .
of course i am here speaking of the values of manuscripts regarded simply as works of art , not of those which are mainly of importance from the interest of their text .
the results of the late auctions indicate quite a falling off in values .
n , along with the known values of the other parameters , to compute b _ n .
the operation time of a piloted valve depends on its size ; typical values are 15 to 150 milliseconds .
horace walpole a dit que _les papes ont consacré à bâtir des temples à la moderne les richesses que leur avait values la dévotion inspirée par les églises gothiques_ .
_he should contribute of his means as god prompts_ him to the support of his church , and not measure himself by the standard of proportionate values .
from luther to kant there is one continuous development of thought , and no less than two revolutions in spiritual values .
on the other hand , when certain species of marine birds are used in accordance with principles of sustained yield , they can provide long-term economic values to society in conjunction with the social , esthetic , and intangible values that their preservation insures .
denotational semantics are given to a program phrase as a function from an environment ( that has the values of its free variables ) to its denotation .
also , all charts are of necessity printed on a flat surface and such a surface can never represent in their true values , all parts of a sphere .
in the first volume of mr. thorpe ’ s anglosaxon laws , at p. 186 , there is a document which professes to give the values of different classes in northumberland .
it may be noted in passing that the high acid values occurring in shell butter may be due in part to the acidity of the benzene employed as a solvent .
farm prices would not govern values for any special use , such as oil drilling , mining , or railroad operation .
spiritual ( imbued sound values and provide a christian environment ) .
i believe that two loans with a certain set of parameters can be compared to each other , for example by looking at the present values of the payments .
it is after the virgin supplies are exhausted -- and that will come in a comparatively short time -- that the great increase in values will come and the public will suffer .
characterized by being strategic , with sneaking movements executed standing or near the floor depending on the situation to face , it values the traditions of malícia , malandragem and unpredictability of the original capoeira .
olympic values of perseverance , hard work , fair play , and respect .
it then introduces the reader to the basic agile values as written in the agile manifesto , and to the six guiding principles of agile project management .
there are various incentives , including an accounting strategy that values the negative net worth of the failing thrift as a capital asset of " goodwill " to the acquiring thrift .
this design values is closely linked to the feminist movement and theory developed within the 19th and 20th centuries .
it is his rigorous transvaluation of all moral values and conventionalities that proclaims this hamlet a man of the future .
there are gaps in the alphabetic values to allow for future system expansion or for decommissioned routes .
and what advantages has a lover , who values not breaking the peace , over his mistress who is solicitous to keep it !
the difference between the measured output and the desired output values is what is called the " error signal " .
this is a list of parties in the world that consider themselves to be upholding the principles and values of social democracy .
if they do not do this , they ought to adhere to the values at first proposed , thus making the channels larger than , according to their ideas , would be necessary .
furthermore , elizabeth and her eldest daughter may have sought to make access to the white house more socially exclusive , reflecting french practices , which were barely tolerated given american democratic values , although president monroe 's term was also known for the good feelings and relations .
the software is the heart of the monitoring system because of its key roles in acquiring data from the attached sensors , computing meaningful values from the measurements , recording results , visualising the changes and alarming responsible persons should threshold value be exceeded .
pores that are not of the same size will fill at different values of pressure , with the smaller ones filling first .
use negative values for locations west of the greenwich meridian .
the values involved in american arbitral proceedings have been enormous .
on the 20th september 1886 the royal commission `` to inquire into the present changes in the relative values of the precious metals '' was appointed .
the interpretation of a propositional variable is one of the two truth values true and false .
philosophically , they seek to balance living their lives in harmony with their values and spending their time on things they enjoy with the need to support themselves financially .
the drops maintained discrete values of distance between each other and were held in stable configuration .
several of his other masses use the widespread cantus firmus technique , where a plainchant melody with long note values is placed in an interior part , often the tenor .
for a good compromise common basic values , trust and good-will are needed .
conviction politics refers to the practice of campaigning based on a politician 's own fundamental values or ideas , rather than attempting to represent an existing consensus or simply take positions that are popular in polls .
j _ 1 where j _ 0 is a jordan algebra and j _ 1 has a " lie-like " product with values in j _ 0 .
where the ohmic values of inductance and capacity are given as in this example , the calculation of impedance is very simple , but when inductance and capacity are given in milli-henrys and microfarads respectively , it is necessary to first calculate their ohmic values as in figs .
he is a great disdainer of humbug , and values truth _quand même_ , as the french say .
what are the qualities in things and persons which he values , the impression and sense of which he can convey to others , in an extraordinary way ?
he is ripe for the marvellous feat of the transvaluation of all values .
your oriental , like the cat , values luxury very highly , and yet , from our point of view , does not seem to secure it .
the foundation 's core values concerning openness , transparency , and conflict of interest , are most familiar to progressive movements in the global north .
`` oh , he values himself on being a thorough gentleman , -- a man of the nicest honour , '' said levy , with a sneer .
but not in relation to values .
half the members of this and the boston and philadelphia exchanges are insolvent and have closed their doors , or will close them before three o'clock , and the shrinkage in values so far reported runs over fifteen billions .
in the second , our object is _to find the value_ of the formulas thus obtained ; that is , to determine directly the values of the numbers sought , which are already represented by certain explicit functions of given numbers ; this is the _arithmetical_ question .
a series of berthe morisot 's works looks like a veritable bouquet whose brilliancy is due less to the colour-schemes which are comparatively soft , grey and blue , than to the absolute correctness of the values .
he has proved himself a master salesman for moral values .
air pollutant emission factors are representative values that people attempt to relate the quantity of a pollutant released to the ambient air with an activity associated with the release of that pollutant .
among the most important of the facilities introduced in 1851 were postage stamps , the values being threepence , sixpence , and one shilling .
the nomos is all the society 's knowledge about how things are , and all of its values and ways of living .
on 13 january 2012 , he was honored with the lithuanian award of freedom for his adherence to democratic values and ideals of freedom .
marsden states an equation between marco 's values of the notes and the actual chinese currency , to which biot seems to assent .
all great ruler-art also takes man as its content ; because human values are the only values that concern it .
it is the responsibility of all the people , as owners of these outstanding national values , to help the service keep the wonders of this and other parks and monuments intact for the enjoyment of future generations .
pen found that they would talk nothing but land values while she was in the tent , so she wandered out in search of jim .
the values he obtained for f´t agreed very well with those previously given by carnot and clapeyron , and showed that this function diminishes with rise of temperature roughly in the inverse ratio of t , as suggested by joule .
traditional arvanite folk songs offer valuable information about social values and ideals of arvanitic societies .
in august of 2014 , his ancestry was researched on the abc series " who do you think you are " and projected a gentle man who values his aboriginal connection .
a nearer approximation is obtained by repeating the operation after turning qt through 180° from the original position , and using the mean of the two values of c thus obtained .
shading coefficient values are calculated using the sum of the primary solar transmittance ( t-value ) and the secondary transmittance .
of course it 's the honor more than the money that counts , '' said bess , whose idea of money values was very hazy , being abundantly supplied by an indulgent father .
all this is known to the queen , who bears alexander no ill will , but rather loves , esteems , and values him .
pdl defines a new type of perl scalar object ( eponymously called a " pdl " , pronounced " piddle " ) that acts as a perl scalar , but that contains a conventional typed array of numeric or character values .
the “ bulls and bears ” on exchange make their gains by fluctuations in market values , and , like all gamblers , delight in producing false impressions upon their opponents in the game .
as for any equation , the solutions of an equation are the values of the variables for which the equation is true .
the following are the unit values of the various games : -- frage shall not be allowed .
hawaiians to return to their lands in order to fully support self-sufficiency for native hawaiians and the self-determination of native hawaiians in the administration of this act , and the preservation of the values , traditions , and culture of native hawaiians .
the currency caught on , and values equal to 100 livres are recorded .
not only are `` hackers '' novel in their activities , but they come in a variety of odd subcultures , with a variety of languages , motives and values .
spinel possesses little colour-dispersion , or ‘ fire. ’ in the same way the values of the specific gravity , even of the transparent stones , vary between 3·5 and 3·7 , but the opaque ceylonite has values as high as 4·1 .
in no more searching way can a man 's faith be described than _in terms of the objects which thus he values most_ .
miraj cities for promoting cooperatives values at regional levels .
in 1961 , the president of indonesia , president sukarno created a ban on western music , mainly the genre of rock and roll , due to the fact that western ideas , themes , values and morals began to infiltrate the area .
lines of workstations showed voltage and amperage values for the power buildup in the coil .
upon examining modern men , we found that there are a large number of _very different_ values to hand , and that they no longer contain any creative power -- the fundamental principle : `` the condition of existence '' is now quite divorced from the moral values .
in considering the question of whether or not a particular contractual provision was in conflict with the interests of the community , the values underpinning the constitution had to be taken into account .
nan ; the square root of a negative number is imaginary , and thus not representable as a real floating-point number , and so is represented by nan ; and nans may be used to represent missing values in computations .
the actions of this individual are in no way representative of the values and integrity held by myself , our players and coaches , and the entire denver broncos organization .
many languages provide a built-in string data type , with specialized notation ( " string literals " ) to build values of that type .
just like π , it is a transcendental number , so any numeric values we give are only approximations .
although the greek portion of the inscription could be easily read , the attempts of various scholars , through a period of twenty years , had succeeded in establishing the values of only a few characters of the egyptian .
if the other images are kept , then i think there needs to be more on them in the article than just though certain encounter values will result in a missingno .
by sight , the coffee man judges the size , shape , and color of the green and roasted bean , which are important factors in determining commercial values .
the all-zeros value and all-ones values are reserved for the network address and broadcast address respectively .
the metal is simply a valuable good , the receiver of which values it according to its weight and fineness .
however , santorum ran an effective grassroots campaign and specifically targeted many union democrats who had reservations about the liberal social values advocated by many of their party 's leaders .
the currency value of the sdr is determined by summing the values in u .
in general , the convenience of our editors is not one of our values when it comes to naming articles .
it said the united states should strengthen ties with its democratic allies , " challenge regimes hostile to our interests and values , " and preserve and extend " an international order friendly to our security , our prosperity , and our principles .
this is the result of pasting the pixel values directly from b onto a .
excel will paste the values transposed .
if we deprive our discourse of gestures , no way is left to prove the truth of values .
pius xi argued for a reconstruction of economic and political life on the basis of religious values .
they wanted every child to learn christian values and principles so they established its mother house in pototan , iloilo where it founded its first school , colegio de la immaculada concepcion .
it was addressed to every american who values the prosperity of his country .
for mr. bierce , as did flaubert , holds that the right word is necessary for the conveyance of the right thought and his sense of word values rarely betrays him into error .
wikipedia is a free online encyclopedia , but it also transcends the values of traditional encyclopedias .
there were several different lines , he remembered , to which carson had called special attention , with the assertion that the values were absolute and the quality guaranteed .
but even as she looked , her simple mind swiftly adjusted values .
the ussa1976 does recognize , however , that this value is not consistent with the cited values for the avogadro constant and the boltzmann constant .
members were also called to approve or reject amendments to the party 's charter of values .
for his strong sense of values and deep commitments to family , church and community , boivin was loved and respected by all who knew him .
critics argued that , rather than defending shared values , the signatories were undermining the authority of international law and the united nations .
the ad hoc usage of chinese characters for their phonetic values dates nearly to the introduction of chinese characters to japan .
he had an infallible eye for the values of blunders , and an incongruity came home to him like a blessing from above .
the table below contains all known exact values .
they produced nothing ; they simply preyed upon labor and dealt with imaginary values .
incidentally , with the same sextant sight values , the utc of local apparent noon and the nautical almanac , the navigator can also determine his latitude thereby achieving a positional fix with a single noon shot of the sun .
the sordid values were due to the demand which came to edwards constantly and unsolicited , and which it was his unvarying policy always to meet .
e._ , the massing of beliefs and hopes of many men , ( 2 ) on his _wealth_ , which rests in the legal and moral values governing distribution , and ( 3 ) on his institutional relationships , which again are psychological facts , partly legal in character .
how distrustful he is of people , and how cheaply he values them !
field names and values are restricted to 7-bit ascii characters .
the most important advantages of film capacitors are the stability of their electrical values over long durations , their reliability , and lower cost than some other types for the same applications .
[ 8 ] the craftsman , the artist , the scientist , the professional man , and to some extent the business man make new experience the basis of organized activity , of work , and produce thereby social values .
although this does not come as a surprise as over time strong traditional dynasties do weaken or fade away however , given the ability of the gardezis to hold on to their traditional values , knowledge base and massive intellectual and civic service contribution , their prestige remains unparalleled .
an interesting barometer of popular values .
the values of the symbols used by goddard are taken from a list he gives in his wailaki texts ( 1923_b_ , p. 77 ) together with phonetic transcription of american indian languages ( amer .
if the metro did not utilize socialist realism , it would fail to illustrate stalinist values and transform soviet citizens into socialists .
it ’ s high time , speakin ’ of values , that young posy should know just what she cost us .
true , exceptions as to this rule of scant provision of the artistic may be found ; but , as in all countries , they quite generally fail to appreciate the educative values of art .
`` mine , too , '' answered harnish , while the others stated the values they put on their own markers , french louis , the most modest , issuing his at a hundred dollars each .
the second and the third may be termed the speculative values , and are largely a matter of judgment based on geological evidence and the industrial outlook .
the intuition behind these algorithms is that variable nodes whose values vary the most are the ones that need to be updated first .
this in its turn will give values for the path aec , so that we can determine a new function for the interior of aecd .
so reconstruction rests upon great spiritual tasks and values , and upon the willingness and ability of the nations to carry these out .
24. -- relation of the moisture content to the various strength values of spruce .
it was curious to note how , under that sharp sunshine and keen night sky , all moral values were changed , or wholly obliterated .
adenauer wanted to win people over to his sort of nationalism which emphasized values such as justice and freedom as things that all germans should cherish .
magical equipment or spells can also modify saving throw values .
the series comprised the values 1c , 5c , 10c , 12-1/2c and 17c these corresponding to the 1/2d , 3d , 6d , 7-1/2d and 10d denominations previously in use .
if man turns away from the outer world and takes refuge in his own sphere , in the social life among his fellows , naturalism there shows him a mere juxtaposition , but no inner community which could offer new aims or develop new values .
one soon gets old and the values of things change ; you do n't want to feel , when it 's too late , that there 's something big and real you might have had and missed . ''
nan tien institute ( nti ) ; australia 's first government accredited tertiary institution grounded in buddhist values and wisdom .
an easy way for importing and managing parameter values are spreadsheets .
the next step for the physicists working at tftr was to put the high values together and get break-even .
chapter v. `` her wit values itself so highly , that to her all matter else seems weak . ''
cheshift-2 can return a list of theoretical chemical shift values from a pdb file .
the centre published regular reports , produces media releases , held seminars , and explored how best to promote tolerance , civic values , and greater cohesion in britain .
it is chiefly because those artist-experts in word values , the poets , who might contribute their special technique to the theatre ’ s art , turn elsewhere creatively , that the field is left unchallenged and open to the gifted school of the visualists .
these values differ but little from those found to obtain for the resemblance between avuncular relatives for eye color ( .265 ) , or between grandparent and grandchild for the same characteristic ( .3164 ) .
although not as detailed as some other personal accounts , the book is liked because it helps the reader see the systematic breakdown of social values and the gradual elimination of jewish rights during the holocaust years .
the sum of all end instrumental values for an object is its all-ends instrumental value .
the basic framework of the banner is a table that uses one of three css classes , depending on the values of the nested and small parameters .
that the young woman , when twenty , should recall the scenes with such minuteness as to make the audience perfectly understand their dramatic values is hardly plausible .
but aside from a profitable acquaintance with values , i know of no place equal to a stockbroking office for the acquirement of that general and intimate knowledge of men and of the town , which , organized and classified , constitutes the science of life .
students learn about the values and culture that have driven hundreds of thousands of volunteers to build wikipedia , which has generated millions of free articles in hundreds of languages since its 2001 launch .
one of them had a hundred and twenty-seven american scalps , strung on a pole , and the rest were laden with various other articles , of different values .
the whole school community , through the general school programme and its instruction and observances , exercises the right to live and teach the values of jesus christ .
perhaps the most significant change in spanish social values , however , was the role of women in society , which , in turn , was related to the nature of the family .
by what standard , or invariable measure at all times and places , can we compare the values of goods to determine their constancy or variability ?
his father said he was raised with working-class values .
assets are mainly stores of expectations regarding future values .
in certain communities devoted to material interests , the pride of wealth dominates to such a degree that men are quoted like values in the stock market .
mr. munsell has invented a photometer to measure values of light and color , and has prepared scales , spheres , charts and pigments for school use .
see below for more examples , including providing few , one or zero b-criteria values .
what say you , antisthenes ? -- have friends their values like domestic slaves ?
in religious terms , several groups are animist , others are buddhist , some are christian , a good number share taoist and confucian values , the hui are muslim , while most societies sport a complex syncretism .
it consists of approximately 37 chapters on calendar and astronomical calculations and 116 tables with calendar , astronomical and astrological data , as well as a table of sine values .
however note that in some applications the labeling of categories as zero and one is arbitrary , so there is nothing special about concordant versus discordant values in these applications .
the ata draws together political leaders , academics , and diplomats in an effort to further the values set forth in the north atlantic treaty - democracy , freedom , liberty , peace , security , and the rule of law .
as a member since 1982 and president since 1990 of the council for international organizations of medical sciences , he helped organize a number of international conferences on health policy , ethics and human values , and various aspects of the international pharmaceutical industry .
it is quite probable that any collector having sufficient material would find `` doubles '' in all of these values .
the motto represents the mandate of the canadian food inspection agency ( cfia ) , its values , and the scientific foundation on which its work is based .
ukrainian state , but will go on to establish equal opportunities for all people to create and share material and spiritual values and in this respect the national revolution is also a social one " .
to protect the various marine conservation values associated with the waters around lord howe island , the new south wales government proclaimed the lord howe island marine park in 1999 .
the bairns have lost their standard of values ; they do n't know limits .
in intermediate positions of the facet both shadow-edges move , and give therefore critical values .
imo , the manually entered values ( e .
we shall confine our study principally to questions of sense relations , such as momentary completeness , values , and the like .
the second preliminary consideration is that the community does not create _all_ land values nor _all_ rent .
those who have the artist 's spirit will find their sense of values quickened by her words , and they will be led to escape some of the errors into which even the greatest artists fall .
its values are centered on filipino hospitality and local culture .
bluth , and animators such as gary goldman , felt that disney were only attempting to reduce the cost of films without paying attention to any artistic values .
[ 29 ] [ grote values this at £11,500,000 which amounts to about $ 55,000,000 .
if you want to change the values of an rlc filter , you either need to use a varactor , or a potentiometer , or tunable capacitor .
he values your opinion highly , sir , and i thought perhaps you would expostulate with him .
however , when b does not admit an algebraic factorization , it is conjectured that an infinite number of n values make q ( b , n ) prime , notice all ns are odd primes .
kalman filters and smoothers to estimate current and past signal values , respectively .
in financial ratios that use income statement sales values , " sales " refers to net sales , not gross sales .
the parliament 's president meanwhile articulates the eu 's values such as democratic elections in other countries .
the application may execute the statement as many times as it wants with different values .
it may contain values which you do not see .
their three values were " god , the netherlands , and the house of orange " .
in that paper money of our own stamping , the legal tender of the mind , we are obliged to reckon all the movements and values of the world .
the production values of the game , however , were higher than those of the early versions of car wars .
hückel theory to determine ph standard values .
finally , _s_ , the surplus value , stands for the total of all surplus values gained by the individual capitalists .
el-zein rejected blind imitation of the west but encouraged informed choices of those ideals and values that could fit easily with conservative muslim society .
the stamps themselves were merely an adaptation of the designs of the pence series to the corresponding values of the decimal currency .
having investigated the values of the masses of the planets , he then determined , by an approximate solution , the values of the several roots of the algebraic equation upon which the variations of the eccentricities and inclinations of the orbits depended .
possessing a far more abundant supply of materials than had been collected before , he was able to assign to a few doubtful characters their proper values .
each club is composed of volunteers who contribute their time to mentor and assist high school students based on christian values and principles .
poor hambright was but a scrawny little village on a red hill with no big values to be saved , and no mills to interest the commercial world , and the auctioneer lifted his hammer .
the sketch of the portfolio on this page is beautiful because it has a fine proportion of parts , and because the gray values of these parts are harmonious .
so , for instance , rules for increasing or reducing the money supply based on perceived inflation , or on measuring well-being , reflect some such values , reflect the importance of using ( all forms of ) financial capital as a stable store of value .
informally , the global consequence relation represents the transmission of full truth in any mtl-algebra of truth values .
after measuring a particle 's position , applying the momentum operator to the new wave function of the particle , now something like a dirac delta , will show a very large range of probable values ) .
since the difference between two values of a constant function vanishes , the same definite integral appears on both sides of the equation .
a tax on land values does not add to prices , and is thus paid directly by the persons on whom it falls .
the long vowels have the primary values , , , and , with varying to , and after labial consonants .
while america is under attack from enemies abroad , our long-term economic security , personal rights , and values are under attack here at home .
feelings are not as strong in malaysia , where most recognise that many cultural values are shared .
an example of the rendering of “ values ” in black and white . ]
according to historian constantin iordachi , this pro-romanianization stand was equivalent to " a kulturkampf " , and often meant " sacrificing democratic and pluralistic values on the altar of historically-motivated nationalism .
we are selling them on the basis on which we bought them , and we bought a lot because we think the values will sell them .
thus , the plantation negro need not feel any personal shame in the moral delinquency which he none the less hides from the `` white folks '' whose values he must more or less conform to .
an uncomprehending and self-willed producer may easily so confuse the values of a well-written play as to ruin its chances .
he instead opted for a restrained classicism more in line with the musical values of clara schumann than franz liszt .
it 's the brush work and the values i look to .
indeed , while rising property values in the 1990s displaced older , long-term residents as middle- and upper-income residents across the city , in few areas were these increases as dramatic as in the enclave of neighborhoods on the eastside of atlanta .
the emotions of my boyhood presented a scene of grand disorder , and those bumblebees helped to organize them , and to clarify and define my sense of values .
weber ’ s law , then , enables us to perceive the identity of the thing although the absolute light or tone values have undergone change .
there are two parallel dramatic actions , the first , more obvious and theatrical , the fate of viera ; the second , of loftier moral , the relations of orozco and augusta , which are decided in a quiet scene , pregnant with spiritual values .
the master , looking about on the many industrious , if not intellectual , faces , was discoursing on marston 's feeling for values .
its constituent elements remained the same ; relative values had much changed .
supreme among the values that come out of it is the enduring quality of the british portion in the things of the mind and of character , in ideals , and standards .
charleston , with her taxable values cut half in two since 1860 , pays more in proportion for public schools than boston .
these values are our faith , our inspiration , the source of our strength and our indomitable determination .
a written click track is a method of writing bars of music in consistent time values ( i .
the student associates a value or some values to the knowledge they acquired .
this was made manifest in new york by the creation of the holland society of new york , an exclusive club aiming to underscore the dutch presence in new york , from dutch values such as religious tolerance to the importance of education .
everywhere land values have been steadily increasing with material progress , and everywhere this increase begot a speculative advance .
out of the ancient religion of dogmas which judges and damns , tuft is by these experiences led into a new religion of love , which values life above faith , and charity above all .
moore that values are non-natural properties .
property embodies the distinctive characteristics of a type , period , or method of construction or represents the work of a master , or possesses high artistic values , or represents a significant anddistinguishable entity whose components lack individual distinction .
the naked land values used in 1900 , being clearly too low , were of no use and were dropped .
the values also vary as widely .
recurring for a moment to our food problem , we may observe that the values that are set on the manors in domesday book seem to point to a very feeble yield of corn .
the point values of both the try and goal have varied over time , and in the early years footballers could " score " a try , without scoring any points .
nisapi 's goal is to create an environment that genuinely honors and values the client and narratives , where the strengths of clients can abound .
but the values conserved are not those created : they are the values postulated by philosophy as metaphysical reality .
but it is worth something , not as explaining social values or market prices , but rather , as showing how individuals _conform_ to social values and market prices .
the object of the paper is to show in what cases a function f ( x ) , which is to have certain arbitrary values between certain values of x , can be expanded in a series of sines and when in a series of cosines .
emancipative values exert these effects because they encourage mass actions that put power holders under pressures to sustain , substantiate or establish democracy , depending on what the current challenge for democracy is .
the more mobility and elasticity a man has , the less he values the ordinary equilibrium of his body ; the oftener he changes his outlook , the more he will take in .
fipresci prize , pablo trapero ; for the uncompromising and raw depiction of the journey of a man lost in a society without values ; 2002 .
but the creation of moral values is a constantly renovated , spontaneous , original activity , in the same sense in which art and poetry are .
in their pragmatic , issued at segovia on 20 february 1475 , they adopted henry 's coinage and set values for the doblas and reales in terms of the maravedí , which by the 15th century had degenerated into a vellón currency .
such spreadsheets can be used to reason deductively about their cell values .
at the sight of her my nocturnal eloquence became preposterous and all the moral values altered altogether .
or we may be indefinite in our interpretation of the moral and religious values inherent in the lesson , and so fail to make a sharp and definite impression of understanding and conviction on our pupils .
one result of these changes was the realignment of white evangelical protestants into the republican party ; such " values voters " now constitute an essential component of the gop coalition .
these include beliefs , values , education and social status .
he partly defended asian values by placing emphasis on co-operation over competition .
[ sidenote : increasing land values ] in the cities and on the small farms of the south and west the prosperity of the italians is marked .
one interesting conclusion is that modern american culture is the result of a melding of native american and european values .
his ' nuova inventione ' refers to his system for indicating the metre and note values with which the music is played .
the distinction between the two meanings is rarely made , since they have almost identical values .
in example 2 , all the values of stock are displayed when statement 35 is encountered .
that is , 29.9 includes all values between 29.900 and 29.999 .
interpreting the challenge to conventional morals by younger literary figures as moral relativism , sherman defended traditional values , nationalism , and even puritanism , a popular scapegoat of the time .
for berlin , values are creations of mankind , rather than products of nature waiting to be discovered .
if the student means to try the experiment of framing a dynamic law , he must assign values to the forces of attraction that caused the trouble ; and in this case he has them in plain evidence .
his values are rather outdated but he is a man of honor and an expert strategist and marksman .
in our psychological phrase , their `` presuppositions '' include elements in the minds of other men , and they themselves constitute part of the '' presuppositions '' of the values in the minds of other men .
these areas were frequently less desirable , lower-income areas which had lower property values precisely because of the risk of flooding .
the larger areas are to be sufficiently reduced in chroma and value to form a slight contrast with the background._ [ sidenote : examples of proportionate distribution ] figure 465 illustrates some of the salient factors of distribution of values and hues .
this pipeline can be applied to assemblies generated across a wide range of k values .
moral values , 22-29 , 40 , 137-38 , 480 , 562 , n. , 567-69 , 582 , 589 .
the show uses this small town backdrop to address many issues facing contemporary american culture , including family values , school funding , racism , drugs , abortion , and lack of economic opportunities .
it is evident that it gives , by indirection , the same total valuation as would be obtained by the direct capitalization of net earnings without any determination of physical values , _per se_ , and , as a method , is therefore not what it purports to be .
effectively , we are only computing the values for which the most significant bit of the window is set .
oh , the unutterable differences in any scheme or estimate of physiognomic values , in any range of sensibility to expressional association , among observers of different , of inevitably more or less opposed , traditional and “ racial ” points of view !
it 's a story a woman ought to know in order to arrive at proper values .
note that the values given are maximum values , and actual values may be slower under certain conditions ( for example , noisy phone lines ) .
i agree with dragons flight that values more than 1000 m are known .
even with small enough granularity , quality problems may arise when precision in the z-buffer 's distance values is not spread evenly over distance .
the expectation values of operators , such as the rate of flow , the heat capacity , and so on , are obtained by integrating over all possible configurations .
istván claimed a divine right to succession and wanted to complete his father 's work in turning hungary into a european christian kingdom ; koppány in contrast stood for the old tribal values of the ancient magyars .
many unions have political factions or caucuses which disagree on the policies , finances , values and goals of the union .
equivalently , substituting values for the constants and expressing them as matrices gives this formulas for bt .
in the meantime it was brought to notice in 1909 that , under the existing method of calculating surrender values of life policies , the values in certain cases were found on calculation to be considerably in excess of the total amount of premia paid on the policies .
of crop values for transportation charges , in order to pay dividends on a capitalization , fifty per cent .
this is from the fourteenth edict : piyadasi , the friend of the devas , values alone the harvest of the next world .
i see it more about making sure the city operates within a set of core values in a way that brings more people into the process .
after much speculation and media tabloid surrounding the investigation , remengesau was found only to have been guilty of not filing properties of land and their values and accrued interest .
for any valuation technique , it is important to look at a range of forecast values .
linda ronstadt 's gay mission " , championed gay rights and same-sex marriage and stated that " homophobia is anti-family values .
but it is not so easy to see why this wretched substitute for values should have circulated so freely to the very last .
former head of norbourg bankruptthe amf filed 51 charges against lacroix in march 2006 related to false and misleading information and manipulating mutual fund values .
the state of a system , which is a collection of the system 's variables values , completely describes the system at any given time .
a few values have been noted on pure white paper .
to get uniformity at little cost , just reject values of rand ( ) greater than 32699 .
this action seems to have been more or less anticipated , for these values were doled out in very small quantities , if at all , in spite of the large orders that were everywhere given for them .
however , this original polemic use has broadened out , and the term is now also used more loosely to refer to period films with high-quality visual production values , including those produced in france , other european countries and beyond .
but i tested it for a few values and it worked !
regedt32 has a left-side tree view , but each hive has its own window , so the tree displays only keys and it represents values as a list of strings .
but when we pass to solutions of mineral salts and acids -- to solutions of electrolytes in fact -- we find that the observed values of the osmotic pressures and of the allied phenomena are greater than the normal values .
spencer-thomas has written extensively on news values , how social media are changing our daily news and the influence of social media on religious thought .
fundamental to this , is the development of values , skills and abilities that will assist the boys to achieve better life outcomes .
i was first published overseas , and have criticised the key government , neo-liberal values , and our culture of anti-intellectualism many times .
although the inertia and drag coefficients can be tuned to give the correct extreme values of the force .
per can , values based on a 2,000 calories per day diet .
we can never hope to `` recover our balance '' by confounding values , a process of self-deception which misleads no one but ourselves .
he is grateful to his family for the selfless support and also for instilling discipline above all other values in him .
but as he was withal honest in his values he added : `` and the old fellow 's worth ten times what i am too ! ''
apart from the fact that these were not cases where accuracy is involved , agricola himself explains ( p. 77 ) that he means the german values for these particular terms , which , fortunately , fairly closely approximate to the english .
one of his earlier results in this area is an extension theorem for completely positive maps with values in the algebra of all bounded operators on a hilbert space .
brainard was exchanging some stacks of chips for bills , and others for chips of higher values , until he was staking the limit allowed on a number .
the recipients of honors were compelled to be examined by doctors and social workers according to genetic and racial values that were considered beneficial .
indeed , in the case of five-beat rhythms the definition of values is greater when such opposition finds place than when the five-beat group is continuously repeated .
`` naturally , their stockholders got mad and wanted to sell , but incorporated men could n't liquidate and the values of the stocks dropped to zero , along with the value of the luxury pay .
thus , for the two degrees of freedom-system there are two critical values for the applied force f .
abolition intermeddling taught her at last to search for and defend the assumed social , economic , and political merit and values of the institution .
it is an analysis by fire , in the crucible of fate and destiny , to determine _accurately_ the measure of values to the individual , to society , and to civilization .
there is just now a great `` boom '' of land values in and about st. paul .
the range of variability of a random variable contains all those values which may be adopted by the future outcome .
to obtain the information required to infer the type of an expression , the compiler either gathers this information as an aggregate and subsequent reduction of the type annotations given for its subexpressions , or through an implicit understanding of the type of various atomic values ( e .
he had now a new estimate of values and results .
the co-relation of equal values in the different colour scales , was secured by an elaborate system of cross-checking , rendered necessary because the establishment of a perfectly colourless neutral tint unit , demanded an exact balance in values of the different colour scales .
in either case we may consider our standards and values either as in some sense fixed or as in the making .
at oxford and cambridge , and probably of english composition , which is a perfectly common-sense account based upon historians , of various dates and values , indeed , ranging from trogus to isidore of seville , but all historians and not romancers .
similar forms are also found in the safa inscriptions ( south semitic ) with similar values , and praetorius argues ( z.d.m.g .
over 15 studies and articles in professional magazines devoted to the improvement of the values in use of apartments and apartment buildings in the systems ims , jingrap , ecodomus and ivanjica ( autonomously or as member of working teams ) .
just as soon as he struck `` shipping values '' that picture would be real , said casey to himself ; and he opened his tool box and set to work changing the tire .
on the other hand , his theory of the struggle for existence challenges us to examine the conditions and discuss the outlook as to the persistence of human life and society and of the values that belong to them .
the transformation matrix is unitary and appropriate parameterization ( depending on whether it is the ckm or pmns matrix ) is done and the values of the parameters determined experimentally .
‘ biedermann ’ s centralblatt für agricultur chemie ’ for june , 1877 , contains the results of some experiments undertaken by a. eckstein on the comparative deodorising values of certain substances .
the indonesian literary critic zuber usman wrote that , unlike most contemporary novels , sariamin 's early works kalau tak untung and pengaruh keadaan did not deal with intergenerational conflict or contrasting traditional and modern values .
he knew _all_ the values of time .
he regards the latter as productive because it creates exchangeable values .
before initiation of treatment , the usual coagulation values should be obtained as baseline and regularly controlled under treatment .
if the values so found differ , values can be found for g_ ( -n ) ^m and h_ ( -n ) ^m which will harmonize the two sets of equations .
the poet ’ s eyes have opened to a new reality ; he no longer values things for themselves ; but in proportion as they contain this quality , they become dear to him .
then we divide the values ( mean is already subtracted ) of each feature by its standard deviation .
we all want a lesson in values .
this may be seen by the values stated in the respective years named .
but nature seldom suffers such high moments to pass before they have been paid for in physical values .
after the hand has been played , a score is taken based on the point values of the cards in the tricks each player has managed to capture .
the director-general of the ordnance survey , southampton , will probably on application state the correction to be applied to the azimuths on this account , and this should be applied , of course , to each of the values obtained .
prior to completing the problem-solving puzzles half of the participants completed a values essay self-affirmation task .
the limiting values of λ are easily ascertained .
when theological dogmas and moral values are thrown into the melting-pot , and the discipline of centuries is dissolved into anarchy , it is natural that artistic traditions should perish along with them .
about the same time lassen assigned the correct values to almost all the letters in the alphabet , and further demonstrated that the language of the inscriptions was akin to the language of the zend and also to the sanskrit , though identical with neither .
or by money values , as in the hickery pickery prescription .
while the involved practices are certainly old and likely do predate homo sapiens , only humans seem to have a history of adding moral values , and i think the question can fit the humanities desk .
[ illustration ] a different arrangement of values .
when another client connected to g2 finds such a file , it is given the hash values for all networks and can search on the other networks with their respective hash values , which increases the number of sources and the download speed of the file .
the output can then be formed by a weighted sum of these stored values .
but he does not fail to recognize ( and herein we see one of the profoundest cultural acquirements of the book ) that this very flux , this transvaluation of values , has its own secular rhythm .
no general values can be named , although it may be classed as clean or compact gravel .
i would also settle for the solution where the input ( u , v ) values are limited to ( 0 , 0 ) , ( 0 , 1 ) , ( 1 , 0 ) and ( 1 , 1 ) .
kouloub was islamic feminist ; many of her core values were rooted in her religion , but she still believed that women deserved more of a purpose than what islam set down for them .
first and foremost is a realization of the aims , or better , the values , and relations of biology .
with this perspective , when you deal with a gaussian variable , its mean μ is fixed by the physical features of the phenomenon you are observing , where the observations are random operators , hence the observed values are specifications of a random sample .
this allowed for both significantly higher precision and a significantly wider range of values than most other low-end programming systems , and made it a reasonable choice for serious numerical work .
this includes fostering the wisest use of our land and water resources , protecting our fish and wildlife , preserving the environmental and cultural values of our national parks and historical places , and providing for the enjoyment of these through outdoor recreation .
it can only be applied slowly , but as people get clearly to understand that socially-created values should be socially-owned values , many of our most recondite problems , like overcrowding , waste-lands , high rating , will be in a fair way to settlement .
equation may also refer to an equality relation that is satisfied only for the values of the variables that one is interested on .
chapter eighteen : educational values the considerations involved in a discussion of educational values have already been brought out in the discussion of aims and interests .
and if p , q are symmetrical functions of the letters , then the general form of such a function is p + q [ delta ] ; this has only the two values p + q [ delta ] , p - q [ delta ] .
if the values are well distributed , a longer interval may be employed than in one subject to marked fluctuations .
vgatherdpd , vgatherqpd , vgatherdps , vgatherqps gathers single or double precision floating point values using either 32 or 64-bit indices and scale .
before discussing the importance of the rediscovery , let us turn back to the other use of that word values .
following an auction in december 2008 the values achieved fell far short of the amounts required to satisfy the secured creditors , let alone the unsecured creditors .
in addition to an agrarian heritage , the colony families brought with them midwest america 's small-town values , institutional structures , and a well-planned city center reminiscent of their old hometowns in minnesota .
it is only necessary to have the property carefully appraised by an expert in real-estate values .
all values of that type have the same combination of field types .
when data is present on execute pins , it will force the object to operate and place results on its output pins , regardless of whether the data inputs have values .
who condemn women to the practical ignorance which makes them too uncertain of values to turn at once from a manifest overcharge ?
greco-iberian , with differences both in the shapes of the glyphs and in their values .
this probably results from the ( non-mathematical ) user failing to understand that any common factor must be less than , or at least not greater than , any of the input values .
knowledge for knowledge 's sake is appealing only to the rare scholar , he who palpitates with interest over the relationship of things to one another , he who seeks to discover values .
it is a farce about the attitudes , values , and slang displayed in the popular culture of the 1920s ( and , to some extent , the early 1930s ) .
`` = -- you study values with your eyes only , but you can not _measure_ values .
in pre-reviewing the land appraisals , it was recognized that it was necessary to update and re-appraise due to a decided decline in land market values in the eastern end of suffolk county .
approximate values are to be obtained by means of fine cross wires fixed in the eyepiece .
he is in love with light , and by his treatment of relative values creates the illusion of sun-flooded landscapes .
is it possible to have a world without moral values ?
the spirit creates values , while the demagogue shrieks to transfer the dead symbols of them .
this is especially useful for large , difficult problems and problems with uncertain costs or values where the uncertainty can be estimated with an appropriate reliability estimation .
precisely because the hopes of the socialists were so unduly high , he values them and still is glad of them , though they have fallen to ruin .
i have included this together with a footnote relating it to current values , but none of the rest of the information you ask about has been published .
the program was noted for the high level of production values and the consistent attempt to present quality entertainment within the constraints of a live presentation .
applications that were display-intensive typically used to access cga video memory directly by casting the hexadecimal constant 0xb8000 to a pointer to an array of 80 unsigned 16-bit int values .
the solution of the normal equations gives the most probable values of the unknown quantities .
she alters the values of things .
the conant system followed the old spanish values for coins , the new coins being pesos , medio-pesos , pesetas , media-pesetas , nickels , and copper cents .
this is something that must be taken into consideration when attempting more precise estimates of critical masses of plutonium isotopes than the approximate values given above , because plutonium metal has a large number of different crystal phases which can have widely varying densities .
this is typical of the speculative values that then prevailed there .
thus the ev is strong because it communicates the artistic values of the work .
continued reflections on the values of confessions and on the workings of memory , as related to the five senses .
the following table summarizes the set of s-gonal t-gonal numbers for small values of s and t .
and following certain values which he has made , he draws the lesson that the study of philosophy must always go together with the study of general culture .
an interpretation of a formal system is the assignment of meanings to the symbols , and truth values to the sentences of a formal system .
but on the contrary , the various working individuals rather appear as mere organs of labor ; or , in so far as labor is represented by exchange values , it may be defined as human labor in general .
the roots are often derived from languages in which this principle did not apply , or else these roots originally had very different sound values from those they have with us .
this bi-partisan plan at first avoided anti-soviet rhetoric , and instead sought to energize positive social values , to spur commercial growth and renewal in europe .
the error involved in attributing value to the past is naturally aggravated when values are to be assigned to the future .
the sheets of both values shew one printer 's guide dot in each side margin , opposite stamps no .
[ 172 ] from tax lists , new york city and boston , and assessable values of new england , u. s. census bureau .
in wordsworth , on the other hand , i should say creative art led : the content of his verse is more than its form ; his spiritual and religious values are greater than his literary and artistic .
the first sum is just from the riemann zeta function ( the values are known ) and the second sum is a telescoping series .
therefore , two error values are calculated that represent the difference and average of the left and right error values .
an rtu can also receive analog data via a communication system from a master or ied ( intelligent electronic device ) sending data values to it .
the benedictine abbey de fécamp , like dauphiny 's grande chartreuse , is but a business enterprise whose stocks and bonds in their inflated values take rank with calumet and hecla , monte carlo 's casino , or other speculative projects .
has its total outcome affected certain values of the fundamental kind just indicated ?
i have expressed my opinion so frequently as to the permanent human values of miss hurst ’ s work that i can only remark here that “ gaslight sonatas ” is one of the very few permanent short story books .
thus , for example , the law of creative resultants is not the least contradiction to the law of the conservation of energy , because the measures by which we determine psychical values can not be compared with those with which we measure physical values .
the use of nominal values can be based on de facto standards or some technical standards .
it presents what is , in effect , a riddle on relative values with almost the force of a kōan .
the treasure was heaped upon the tombstone , and as i regarded it i foresaw the difficulty of the task before me ; for the pieces were obviously of very varied values , and i did not see how i could easily distribute them into four equal shares .
poster artists of germany and austria have developed the “ block ” type into a very strong letter of wide strokes , which , when printed in color , show forth color values attractively ( example 235 , chapter on “ announcements ” ) .
the president himself values the evidence of the past .
by certain of the justices , this result was held to be required by `` the preferred position '' of some of these freedoms in the hierarchy of constitutional values ; an idea to which certain other justices demurred .
these were actually the three values which were demonstrated in the experiment .
check constraint , where a column value is mandated to be a specific value or within a range of values on the basis of a simple calculation .
reflecting the borgatti family 's religious values , the store was not open on sunday .
in addition , resort towns are often popular with wealthy retirees and people wishing to purchase vacation homes , which typically drives up property values and the cost of living in the region .
he doesn 't recognize the distinction between facts and values .
gl ( 2n , r ) in terms of transition maps , a g-bundle can be reduced if and only if the transition maps can be taken to have values in h .
quaker values the school periodically sponsors community seminars on parenting the school is supported by private donations , local friends meetings , equipment donations from local colleges and other private schools , as well as tuition .
xavier herbert - although not formally associated with the movement , his capricornia of 1938 , describes the early pioneer movement in the contemporary northern territory , australian values , and white settler relationships positive and negative with the natives , as well as the native culture itself .
thus any desired number of corresponding values of h and b can be easily and quickly found .
dropped enemies award larger point values than crushed ones ; therefore , to obtain a high score , the player must attract more than one enemy onto an ingredient just before dropping it .
defines five class templates ( valarray , slice _ array , gslice _ array , mask _ array , and indirect _ array ) , two classes ( slice and gslice ) , and a series of related function templates for representing and manipulating arrays of values .
good and evil , then , are not permanent absolute values ; they are transient , relative values , serving an end which can be explained in terms of biology and anthropology .
a list of samples should be given with their location , and the tonnages and values of each separate block .
so , i believe the only way it could have any values is if it were run by a woman .
a few of those beliefs are regarding ethics , values , spirituality , human rights and diversity .
richter 's values were questioned " ; in 1981 , " a victim of passing fashion and changing taste , he died an embittered man .
it simply produces the equivalent of its value , which is the sum total of all the values absorbed during the time when it was being produced .
he had said , `` no , boys do not kill ; and after all even the duel has its values . ''
he had to adjust values .
“ i see by your face that you are a young man who values his word. ” then he lifted his voice , and answered : “ here i am , miss bellwood .
this thesis presents some interesting parallels between the way articles are developed within wikipedia and other encyclopedias , despite vastly different timescales and some differing underlying values .
one who lives alone as i do values the love of a faithful animal. ’ when the maiden was about to leave me i gained courage to speak to her of what had been so long in my mind .
the other player bids any value equal to v or higher , or mixes among any values v or higher .
here the function of philosophy should be clear ; for the educator touches at almost every point those problems of values , individual and social , which are the special hunting-ground of the philosopher .
each cell accepts a single integer as value ; and there is a formula stating that the value of the third cell is the sum of the values of the other two cells .
even if some people of wealth and ease and leisure were not as careful about moral values as about colors , and aesthetic harmonies -- that meant nothing .
for such formulations must remain essentially open to modification and reformulation based upon moral values as they are perceived in relation to the data and the experience which mark man 's understanding of himself .
several books have been written to unravel its wonders albeit with limited hypothetical conclusions and are oriented more towards sensitivity of its values .
nelker. -- the early stamps of lagos and labnan are very scarce , used or unused , although many thousands of the lower values were used in making up packets in the '80s .
how is it possible that a man can respect himself _only_ in regard to moral values , that he subordinates and despises everything in favour of good , evil , improvement , spiritual salvation , etc. ?
while described by a recent critic as " best left unread " , the novels reveal social and moral values to which the author gave full expression in his 1909 publication man 's origin , destiny , and duty , an apology for christianity .
the example given above , f , has the following critical points and critical values .
land values in the town have been going up all the time .
according to m. harrisse 1,000,000 maravedis would be equivalent to 295,175 francs , or about 59,000 gold dollars of united states money at present values .
thus are honors distributed , and thus , too , does the public show which talent it values most .
he too believed that traditional moslems had created an inferior society by not following true islamic laws , that advocated the right of females in society , but instead followed cultural values to keep egyptian women in submission .
the ones he values most are from collingwood , and his old captain , vincent , and from his cousin nelson 's hardy , who didn't come off very well himself after the war .
the following example illustrates how these values can be derived .
over the course of the fifteenth century , like most other note values , the head of the maxima became void .
except on the frontier , business was booming in the new towns , while a regular revolution had taken place within the past month in land values .
this should return the wikidata values for birthplace , spouse , citizenship , religion , gender , date of birth ( twice ) and year of birth , if they exist .
k defines a figure from which all other values can be obtained ( different bandwidths , temperatures ) .
while having no more authorization than any other of the occasional canadian `` splits , '' yet this cover is particularly interesting because of its hailing from nova scotia , where split stamps had been used and recognized for their fractional values when the local issue was employed .
catharines and guelph in 2013 led to the adoption of the name community carshare in order to simplify the use of the name and convey the values of the organization .
_paper_ : food values .
the mind must be alert to seek amidst present confusion new signs of the eternal values .
kant seeks to isolate the moral consciousness , and dwell upon it in its purity , in order that he may demonstrate its incommensurability with the values of inclination and sensibility .
christian values of love , goodness and truth and intellectually , morally and spiritually prepared to face their life in future .
when a beachcomber became totally dependent upon coastal fishing for his sustenance , or abandoned his original culture and set of values , then the term " beachcomber " was synonymous with a criminal , a drifter , or a bum .
however where a hectares value has been drawn from a cited source , it ought not to be replaced with the equivalent square metres value , rather both values should be shown .
although dynamic memory is only specified and guaranteed to retain its contents when supplied with power and refreshed every short period of time ( often ) , the memory cell capacitors often retain their values for significantly longer , particularly at low temperatures .
it is a 4-vector , whose components describe the object抯 centroid as well as x and y scales that define a bounding box around the object , so the space of possible values it can take on is enormous .
at the same values of the control parameters , there coexist regions in the phase space with regular and chaotic motion .
the process of influence is mostly interactive , as there might be conflicting interests in resources , goals and values .
some of the bungalows have been restored , while property values have risen considerably .
for example , we may seek a harmonic function that takes on the values u ( θ ) on a circle of radius one .
instead mcgregor was interpreted as advocating theory y as a new and superior ethic - a set of moral values that ought to replace the values managers usually accept .
suppose in making the test , the deflections on the meters for the first readings be 63 volts and 0 amperes , the plotting of these values will give the first point on the curve .
cambia 's goal has always been to enable innovation and their move towards free and open tools that help people understand intellectual property landscapes is a continuation of those values .
my boss said that we need a program that periodically checks a database sequence 's current number , compares it with previous values and estimates when the sequence is going to be exceeded .
sitting at the table and covering a sheet of paper with line-scribble he is wholly self-centred , ‘ amusing himself , ’ as we say , and caring nothing about the production of “ objective values ” .
this information on relative values is communicated , through price signals , to producers whose resources are also limited .
he values though more than expression ; matter , more than form ; and , judging him from a strictly poetic point of view , he has lost his balance in this direction , as so many have lost it in the opposite one .
`` [ 49 ] it is not necessary to cite further evidence to show that billions of dollars of fictitious values were saddled upon the country between the end of the civil war and the close of the century .
he is born into a system of values expressed in social organization and social institutions .
owing to the big returns from dairying in the best parts of the settled portions of the north coast , land values are high , ranging to over $ 96.00 per acre .
slopes and intercepts of regression lines , as well as other mean values , were compared with _t_-tests ( statistical analysis system , 1982 ; ott , 1984:138-175 ) .
herr ludwig rosenthal , antiquariat , munich , has a copy of this rare plate in his possession , which he values at 600 marks .
rgb values ) of the specular and diffuse components of the light sources , respectively .
in order that moral values may attain to _supremacy , _ a host of immoral forces and passions must assist them .
he thinks too much about what is right and wrong , about what is due to himself , and he values his own judgment too highly .
larry had followed the market since he had been in a broker 's office almost ten years earlier , so he knew what stock values had been and had some idea of what they were now .
more than ever , then , is it necessary to be firm against their blandishments , for when the crash comes it will be a terrific one , and those who have great holdings of speculative securities will surely find their values cut in half .
he gets away finally , -- all delightful experiences must end in this work-a-day world , -- still chuckling , but with a renewed sense of life and life's values .
therefore it is important for companies to strive to become a csp-oriented company , where the leadership strives for ever-improving agreements , policies and values .
war security issues often represent the effort of the government -- as at the present time -- to bring into the present every possible bit of future values , as a means of increasing their power in a desperate struggle .
this means that the category can be suppressed with addtrackingcategory values including " no " , " n " , 0 , " false " , and .
it is noted for projecting human values and inter-group harmony .
the ban was instituted by the radio and television high council , on grounds that such programming violated turkey 's cultural values .
to alexander black , the man who made the first picture play twenty-one years ago , i owe thanks for points in the discussion of dramatic values .
we will , in the first instance , denote by it an infinitesimal variation of the most general kind , affecting not merely the values of the co-ordinates at any instant , but also the initial and final configurations and the times of passing through them .
in jazz the term means using note values twice as fast as previously but without changing the pace of the chord progressions .
in other words , is there nothing but venial sin in thefts of little values , or is there only one big sin at the end ?
in some cases unhealthy tissue may have a lower system q , meaning that the system acts more like a large heavy spring as compared to higher values of system q ( healthy tissue ) that respond to higher forcing frequencies .
assuming that the underlying distribution is symmetric , by considering the distribution of values above and below the median zheng and gastwirth have argued thatzheng t , gastwirth j ( 2010 ) " on bootstrap tests of symmetry about an unknown median " .
paid policy holders for claims by death , dividends , surrender values , discounted and matured endowments and annuities 4,935,171.43 other disbursements as per extended statement 1,195,841.88 -- -- -- -- net cash assets , december 31 , 1878 $ 34,195,368.53 assets .
the separation of improvement values from site values was regarded as insane , but it worked well in british columbia .
still while the questions of art , of form , of taste , are paramount in most other poets , -- certainly in all third and fourth rate poets , in whitman they are swallowed up in other questions and values .
it is only thus that one can get the values right -- see right and wrong , truth and error , beauty and ugliness in their broad and cumulative effects .
john candy , one of the school 's most famous alumni , said during one of his annual visits to the school , " my success is simply rooted in the values and discipline and respect for others that i was taught at neil mcneil .
they anchor values and kin-based relationships in the land .
other values are as follows : -- prjevalsky , by his second and third explorations 94° 26' krishna .
i 'll give my nose -- true , it 's only a small one , but everybody values that feature most -- if they do n't persuade him to leave that horrible crow 's nest in the middle of the sea .
in reading such a compiled record as the foregoing , it is to be remembered that in all things that affect spiritual values the only true record is that which is kept in another world .
for values are human , anthropocentric .
a 555 timer will deliver a cleaner better defined squarewave and its frequency is more easily predicted by calculation based on the r and c values .
while the british were engaged in swinging the kater invariable pendulums to determine relative values of the length of the seconds pendulum , or of gravity , the french also sent out expeditions .
written in a journalistic style and derived from actual events , tjerita oeij se has been read as a condemnation of interethnic marriages between ethnic chinese women and non-chinese men as well as reinforcement ( or , alternatively , critique ) of traditional chinese values .
millennials will align with somebody regardless of political labels , based on values .
the people of heiningen honorably sought from then on to gain strength , to preserve a maximum of freedom , and always to let themselves renew and affirm these values .
the disputed questions involved , as far as tangible property is concerned , were : 1.—whether the values ascribed to the several enumerated items are based on competent and persuasive evidence .
the renormalization procedure is a specific procedure to make these divergent integrals finite and obtain ( and predict ) finite values for physically measurable quantities .
negative numbers and zero can be ignored because the logarithm of these values is undefined .
the fact is , simply , that ethical and esthetic values may constantly reinforce economic values , economic values reinforce ethical values , or economic and ethical or other values may oppose each other , and marginal equilibria are constantly worked out between them .
day 1946 , ( formally ) declined claims of divinity , keeping with traditional family values as expressed in the shinto religion .
in general , when computing values of the gamma function , we must settle for numerical approximations .
logarithms of values shewn in fig .
she had been ashamed at the instant , and she was ashamed now when she remembered it , for there is nothing so contagious as an active regard for the petty social values of life .
but the outcome has been a doctrine of the production of values , and value , in mr. clark 's as in other utility systems , is a matter of valuation ; which throws the whole excursion back into the field of distribution .
if they keep to previous patterns , hadcru will probably release their values middle to end of next week .
the amish merely wish to live in a world where technology does not interfer with their cultural values .
35 ) we can not safely interpolate values for the first three days , that is to say for the dates between amputation and the first actual measurement of the regenerated part .
thirdly , the family sets spiritual values first .
all monetary values are in the new zealand dollar .
the question of values is more _fundamental_ than the question of certainty : the latter only becomes serious once the question of values has been answered .
investments in publicly traded corporations should only be made at corresponding values one would make if buying the whole company in a private transaction .
yaumati is a section of hongkong ’ s colony on the china mainland , and values there are not so high as on hilly hongkong island .
so were millions of innocent americans who 've seen their home values decline .
usually those values are left empty , and no row is shown ( or a default value ) .
the global social policy obliges the employees to adhere to core values based on international rules and standards .
[ illustration : specimen victorian issues ] the king edward vii issues of 1902-3 were of the same corresponding values as those of the queen victoria stamps 1882-1900 .
wages , like other values , must be determined by final utility .
tsiyonut ruchanit ) is a strain of the concept of zionism that values jewish culture and history , including language and historical roots , rather than other zionist ideas such as political zionism .
in the statistical study of time-series , if f is a function of time , then looking only at its values at equally spaced points of time is called " sampling .
artists began attacking the values of established institutions of government , industry , and culture .
the woman who values her good name should set her love upon a noble and valiant knight : when she knows his worth , let her not hide her love .
values of b depend on details of the experiment set up , but values of s are consistently found to be around 0 .
he disliked intensely the liberal values of the weimar republic and was against individualism , socialism , and democracy .
king edward was first revealed to us philatelically by the halfpenny , penny , twopence-halfpenny , and sixpenny values of great britain -- these four stamps being issued on the same day , january 1 , 1902 .
nuts , vitamins supplied by , 42 ; among the best foods , 48 ; digestibility of , when properly chewed , 49 ; table of food values of , 183 .
bound together in the daily obedience of self-surrender , urged by the conditions of their task to regard duty as inexorable , confronted by the pitiless destruction of the body , they were forced into a new recognition of the spiritual values of life .
promotion of these values is one of the key responsibilities of kanjirowa national higher secondary school for the production of responsible citizens of the country .
i do not say it in mere hostility to the religion of mahomet ; as will be apparent later , i am fully conscious of many values and virtues in it ; but certainly it was islam that was the invasion and christendom that was the thing invaded .
does the equal right to use the bounty of nature include the right to equal _shares_ of land , or land values , or land advantages ?
reforms in argentina were the result of the university revolution of 1918 and its posterior reforms by incorporating values that sought for a more equal and laic higher education system .
much of the tension between archeologists and first nations in the americas has arisen because the latter believe that " current heritage ethics and values almost exclusively reflect the values and beliefs of euro-americans " .
despite the fact that there might have been further issues , only values from the first issue are known to exist , and these are very rare and expensive .
thus , “ tïcerr-je. ” the connaught values of the letters , specially those of renvyle , are the basis of the alphabet .
[ 63 ] or , if his model happened to be the highest product of chinese values , his object would be to transcend even that , and to point to something higher .
when oversampling by a factor of n , the dynamic range increases by log2 ( n ) bits , because there are n times as many possible values for the sum .
on the other hand , it has revealed to the peoples so aiding their european rulers their real values to them .
these factors include transmitted patterns of ideas through values and beliefs , which are perpetuated through practices , institutions , and other channels .
and then had come those other years -- the maturing , ripening years -- when , from the simple , primitive and enduring elements of life , she had gone to live amid complex , cultivated and largely fanciful standards and values .
i do reference two complete original ten key values ( tkv ) statements , after listing the values themselves ( in the sentence you describe in your last comment below ) .
it is an objection to it that if m increases indefinitely the limit towards which mi/v² tends is different for different values of the roughness .
he has access to a whole system of social values .
it is not enough that the college student should gain fluency in french or spanish , he must also and primarily be made conscious of the processes of language , its logical and æsthetic values , the civilization it expresses , and the thoughts it has to convey .
intelligence quotient values .
as a result , many workers involved in the labor movement joined social democratic and communist parties , which were sometimes secular and called for revolution against " old " values , which included religion and the church .
the play gives a critical survey of english manners and morals , it exposes the corruption of political life and the false values of the beau monde .
but it generally is more complicated ; the kidneys have primary responsibility for keeping many of the overall concentrations of things in the blood , especially ions , at the right values .
australia 's insolation greatly exceeds the average values in europe , russia , and most of north america .
pye was long known in art circles as the `` father of landscape engraving , '' and he certainly succeeded , as no other engraver has done , in his translation of colour values and suggestion of aërial perspectives .
to bring this about , the principle under which the merely economic mechanics of values have free play must be rejected ; and instead of it , the original personal and political rights of men must be recognised .
furthermore , the tpm has the capability to digitally sign the pcr values ( i .
he accepted the situation as though he had been a party to it , and under the same circumstances would do it again , the more readily for knowing the exact values .
very often , especially in young folks , there is no proper estimation of values in life and no recognition of the fact that human life was evidently not meant for happiness since that comes to but few , while suffering and partings are inevitable .
the values assigned to the several functions are purely arbitrary in the first place , and in the second place the decision as to how near those values any mixer approaches are matters of personal judgment .
high values of the icf characterize a state in which the index predominantly affects the market dynamics while it shades the effect of other degrees of freedom that can contribute to the market flexibility .
it is given to west point graduates who have displayed courage in combat and upheld the values of west point .
thus the need for greater spiritual integration within forces , and increased emphasis upon the values of more perfect communication in all forms , at the same time that each individual is trained to initiate action for the common good .
he who values himself also values his fellows ; but , unfortunately a man all too seldom values even himself . ''
in derbyshire , where large numbers were made , they had relative values .
word digest chaining valuesthe size of message digest equals to the size of chaining values usually .
a cbs simulator runs a process by returning a list of values it broadcasts .
by sard 's theorem ( pm ) , the set of regular values has full measure , which means that if there are any values of c such that the solution set is continuous , those values form a set of measure 0 .
the state has 28 mountain peaks , more than 80 glaciers , sikkim 's hot springs are renowned for their medicinal and therapeutic values .
while all commodities express their exchange values in gold , gold expresses its exchange value directly in all commodities .
christian ) which in turns shares a lot of values with all the other monotheistic religions .
the cauldron featured three pillars representing the university 's core values of excellence , leadership , and service and 7 flowers representing the constituent universities , to wit , u .
the mission of the channel is a formation of moral philosophy and a system of coordinates needed for effective development of the state , based on the old aged orthodox values , development and strengthening of spiritual and moral foundations of the russian state .
geneva reminds me of a new england village , as indeed there , and in the neighborhood , are many new-englanders of an excellent stamp , generous , intelligent , discreet , and seeking to win from life its true values .
these two values _causally_ determine that exchange relation .
the ratio is between their values .
the concept hormé is an energic expression for psychological values . ]
vertical incident sounding uses a collocated transmitter and receiver and involves directing a range of frequencies vertically to the ionosphere and measuring the values of the reflected returned signals to determine the effective ionosphere layer altitude .
and , of course , the influence of individual caprice , or individual decisions , on all values grows greater as wealth and power are concentrated .
economic growth has slowed in china with sharp drops in property and stock values .
in the confusion caused by the clash of old and new values , the poet has a premonition of the feelings of emptiness and desolation that were soon to assail him but he decides to align with the new .
no social or other considerations exist that would justify a depreciation in land values of from twenty to forty per cent .
perceived by many as a revolt against the secular modernity of the west , iranian revolution was welcomed by some western thinkers as a triumph of spiritual values over the profane world of capitalist materialism .
all monetary figures are in 2003 values .
he values nothing much but what is , like himself , eternal .
37 _the average man_ in this welter of dissolving values , the intellectuals of our time find themselves struggling , and liable at any moment to be engulfed .
( ap ‘ 17 ) ward , h. f : labor movement from the standpoint of religious values .
the use of industrial designers in a product development process may lead to added values by improved usability , lowered production costs and more appealing products .
when the art student sketches the masses of dark‐and‐light in pictures , the “ spotting ” as he calls it , he is studying notan of two values , but in an aimless way .
once a curve has been fitted , the user can then define various measures of shift , twist and butterfly , and calculate their values from the calculated parameters .
[ 348 ] the securing of indices which will measure satisfactorily even such social values as are generally accepted is difficult .
as the last issue , comprised the following values -- watermarked crown c.a .
as in many other domains of literate condition , it is as though institutions , norms , and regulations take on lives of their own , as literate language does , perpetuating their own values and expectations .
`` the necklace was a graduation present to this man 's sister , and she values it very highly ! ''
programs that support this feature commonly do so by calculating and storing hash values of each file so they can detect if two files with different names , modification dates , etc .
all values at standard pressure ( 101 .
in these he determined successfully the values of several signs , settled the numerals , and was apparently on the high-road toward the translation of an entire assyrian text .
healthcare professionals and their organizations can overcome the myriad barriers to communication across systems of care by developing a polst program , creating a method that respects some of the most deeply held values of patients .
all other operators produce opinions where the expectation value and the variance are always equal to the analytically correct values .
the words of an old song rang in his ears : -- she laughs at the thought of love -- pain she scorns , and sorrow she sets aside -- my heart she values less than her broidered glove , she would smile if i died !
[ massing in two values , from corot , daubigny and hokusai . ]
this law has killed speculation on exchange values , which before it was passed had assumed scandalous proportions , and went far to developing throughout the country that passion for gambling which is even now a corroding cancer at the heart of the young republic .
it is possible that some characters had a value in elam not known in babylonia , or ideographic values not yet recognized .
milford had asserted before the second circuit that it would have allowed a public group to use aesop 's fables to impart moral values to children .
have you no sense of values or of decency ?
mainly , wherever possible publisher values should be presented .
p takes on values 0 if the predicate is true and 1 if the predicate is false .
homer wrote nearly three thousand years ago as supreme an expression of human life in absolute literary values as the world has ever known , or , with all reverence for the future be it said , is ever likely to know .
a prolific writer and popular performer , hampton is known for his patriotism , his family values and christian beliefs .
american citizenship is not based on belonging to a particular ethnicity , but on political loyalty to american democracy and values .
women know how little such purely superficial values are worth .
black-scholes ; option values here ultimately consistent with the capm .
holmes came to the conclusion that the values and ambitions of the beat generation were symbolic of something bigger , which was the inspiration for go .
to-day the estates would scarcely bring $ 30,000 , showing the change in values caused by the civil war .
he values them exceedingly ; and can not but value them , as the means which god uses for his help and blessing ; but he does not allow them to displace god .
she argued , first , that the home was the creation of woman and the place where the values of women were nourished and protected .
it was that which once took the visitor out of himself , away from affairs , and gave him touch with a different world , a sense of different values .
they found that the most sensitive ic50 values , which were the closest to those in the literature , were performed by this electronic cell counter .
yet certain latent conceptions of the real values of existence must have sprung up in him , and protested against days to be thereafter dominated by artificial restraints .
its physical power he values chiefly as the creator and maintainer of the conditions necessary to the production and influence of this higher power .
a sacred duty , subtitled applying jewish values to help heal the world , is a 2007 60-minute documentary from jewish vegetarians of north america ( jvna ) , written and produced by lionel friedberg .
typical values vary from to .
land values fell very rapidly , and in some instances land was purchased by the agents of the bank of chosen for one-fifth of its former valuation . ''
cried the squinting child , whose eyes had seen straight enough , and who seemed to have a keen sense of values .
as a result , a federal facility for testing soil values was established at harsum , part of machtsum , which was located within the hildesheim börde .
the movie is a typical melodrama teaching moral values .
at fac i will strenuously defend the right not to use updated values and there is certainly no requirement to do so , regardless of what some zealots believe .
but economic analysis is not greatly concerned with these distinctions , except in so far as they affect the values of the things exchanged , and so the terms of the exchanges .
in general the values in these lists should not include failed attempts except when mentioned otherwise .
in the practical setting the population values are typically not known and must be estimated from sample statistics .
we want to believe that business is concerned with fundamental values when its representatives discuss the difficulties mid-level executives have in articulating goals and plans for achieving them in speech or writing .
these prespecified values are called the defaults .
it may be possible to modify the values of ( mutable ) literals in program code .
social purchasing networks are able to link buyers and sellers together who share values of faith , politics , charitable causes , and institutional affinities .
to gain an idea of the entire significance of this increase in values , we must go back to the more than modest prices of rural property which ruled before the later development of the upward movement .
i who am forced to feel with shame and pain every hour of the day that i myself am nothing , that with the exception of two or three friends every human being who comes near me values me for my money !
the winemaker , ricardo cottarello , is a legend and a great guy , and while some of his wines are bloody expensive , vitiano consistently represents one of the best wine values in the world .
only because they are bound up with a system of attitudes and values dear to men , are these mystic beings given that half-belief which { 29 } prevents them from falling into that limbo to which dragons and griffins and nymphs have descended .
hence , the thermodynamic method differs from the conventional pump testing method largely in what is measured , and how those values are calculated .
it should accentuate human values and human dignity .
they handled five cases in which they proposed higher values than those of the ord appraisers , but the landowners rejected them as well , so the army discontinued the use of this method .
while probability-outcome independence may hold across outcomes of different monetary values , it is unlikely to hold across outcomes of varying affects .
although for governmental affairs he was confucian in values , he embraced buddhism as well .
_answer._ -- this is a very large question -- how to change the ethical values of a woman 's life !
the shrinkage in values in a few hours , of good and honest stocks , will come to twice as much as would pay for the russo-japanese war .
the standard includes both the established values of stable isotopes found in waters and calibration materials provided for standardization and interlaboratory comparisons of instruments used to measure these values in experimental materials .
he predicted that intrinsic to a material , which manifests negative values of effective permittivity and permeability , are several types of reversed physics phenomena .
the values which it embodies are said to be those of a different generation and omits in particular children 's rights , information rights and socio-economic rights .
this document sets up the enemy of svoboda , a pseudonationalist , a person who wants " all-ukrainian values " ( " українськість " , " щоб все було українське " ) and adheres to " conventional liberalism [ of ] ' civilized ' western democracy and capitalism " .
in the 1869 issue of the stamps of the united states no less than three of the values had the central portions of their designs printed upside down .
from the perspective of the relationships characteristic of an individual 's literate language and literacy programs of societies claiming to be democratic , the answer should be sought in the conflict between literacy-based values and the expectations of efficiency characteristic of the new scale of humankind .
it is an education based on the values of respect for others , rights , freedom , and individual responsibility , which helps to form leaders who are now guiding the nation .
he said the script appealed to him because of the basic values it underlined and because the themes were universal even though the story was local .
134. -- can you find the middle values of gray ? ]
these values as well as its short-term orbital evolution are very similar to those of 5261 eureka .
humanity is the same the world over , and there is more than a shadow of truth in the saying that society values a man pretty much as he appears to value himself .
they knew , for instance , that their farm values were a third higher because of the presence of the church and its work , but they would find that the profit motive was not big enough to keep the church going .
it is quite superfluous to analyze further the values of a poetic form which has helped to make the _gloria_ one of the truly magnificent christian hymns of all ages .
he later related that while he travelled to england believing it more advanced than libya , he returned home " more confident and proud of our values , ideals and social character .
the gross produce of the parish before enclosure he values as follows : -- £ _s .
the values to give for state , s1 , .
since java enum values are globally accessible , so is the singleton , initialized lazily by the class loader .
the occurrence of zero outcomes , though , means it is no longer so obvious how the values of e are to be estimated from the experimental data .
our present concern is with those values and rents which are to be attributed to social action .
kw values for liquid water .
baker street by gary reed and guy davis , it features an alternative sherlock holmes world where the values and class system of victorian era england carried over into a late 20th century where world war ii never occurred .
if the outputs do not reasonably match historic values during the validation process , the model should be reviewed and updated to produce results more in line with expectations .
do n't know that i 'm a cynic or much of a philosopher , but the folks i knew seemed to have a wrong idea of values .
mostly residential , the east side is the most affluent part of the city with higher property values , lower unemployment , and higher income levels than the city as a whole .
by the time red beard was released , in 1965 , the postwar era of values like ' humanism , ' ' culture ' and ' democracy ' was over .
these incidents occur because of different cultural values or different individual beliefs .
_beowulf_ must have been composed at a time or in a dialect when the earlier metrical values held good .
who values it ? ” “ i do , ” i made answer .
he values the articles at 384_l._ 18_s._ this valuation may have been a _sort of off-hand guess_ , as if it had been quite immaterial to mr. elsee what became of his property , as we have already stated that he was never consulted as to its disposal .
only the final chapter will concern itself with values .
all new cast members attend ' traditions ' on their first day of work ; this class imparts the importance of disney culture , heritage , values and policies through media and group activities .
besides memorandum pages , it will contain lists of words often misspelled , cost of college courses , values of the rare stamps , a calendar , and about 1000 other facts worth knowing .
the final list of candidates is drawn up by the national candidature commission taking into account criteria such as candidates ' merit , patriotism , ethical values and revolutionary history .
table ii. -- recent values of the magnetic elements and their rate of secular change .
it is difficult to standardise values , as so many factors are involved in the valuation of war medals .
the old values of customer service still reigned above all else .
the data for this problem , as presented in table 9 , have values quite different from those for the monkeys , chiefly because of the more variable conditions of observation .
the shares are valued at between 24 and 29 euros , which values the williams f1 team at 265 million euros .
moral codes , practices , values , institutions , traditions , and rituals are often traditionally associated with the core belief , and these may have some overlap with concepts in secular philosophy .
a voter 's opinion at any given time can take one of two values , labelled 0 and 1 .
all the values of the scene had shifted .
( _c_ ) levy rates on the rental values of the district , and borrow money on the security of such rates for any of the above purposes .
for example , for a persongendercode the allowable code valid values might be " male " , " female " or " unknown " .
the trip by dc area residents to see george washington 's family estate at mount vernon was seen in the late 19th and early 20th centuries as a patriotic duty as well as an opportunity to learn about american history and democratic values .
it follows from the theory of international values , as laid down by mill , that the permanent residence of americans in europe may enhance the cost of foreign imports to americans residing at home .
connascence of meaning ( com ) connascence of meaning is when multiple components must agree on the meaning of particular values .
increasingly it is recognized that the problems are problems of values and prices .
the values of these keys could be programmed .
includes standard stub documention and flags stub templates with bad parameter values .
unless some course is adopted that will prevent this large export of gold , it is only a question of time when we shall have no gold in the country , and the only representative of values left us will be paper money without any intrinsic value .
this often uncovers client values , beliefs and strengths .
the speculative spirit which arose from the inflation of values during that period in some degree affected almost every one , and still survives , when all values but that of labor have sunk to nearly their former level .
the median values of reported measurements are given .
its depression will reduce the earnings of innumerable monopoly schemes , and the speculative opportunities of capital in the former rapid rise of land values will be reduced to a minimum .
the less expenditure of tone values you can express your modelling with , the better , as a general rule .
stability of gold and silver values , 81-97 ; gold standard prices , 81 ; european economists on prices , 83 ; decline in prices , 90 ; silver-standard prices , 94 .
freddy was beginning to assume proprietary airs toward the cot , which appeared in every town , and even to express views as to the relative values of cots in springfield , akron , or joliet -- when one night he woke to hear florette sobbing .
although each circle was supposed to lie horizontally , only the black lowest circle presents a level of uniform values .
certain of the vegetables such as potatoes have a substantial value in this respect , but meat and most prepared milks are low in antiscorbutic values .
the calculations are greatly simplified by setting all the resistors ( except the negative feedback resistor ) and all the capacitors to the same values .
explaining his decision , miller said holtman 's experience " speaks for itself " and added " his values and what he stands for , who he is as a person , fits butler university .
strings are represented by a sequence of integer values .
undermining of family values forty-seven and moral codes forty-eight holden 's being a poor role model forty-nine , encouragement of rebellion fifty , and promotion of drinking , smoking , lying , and promiscuity fifty-one .
it is about performance , values and utility .
in 1981 karl huggins modified the us navy 6 compartment model using m values derived to follow the spencer no-decompression limits .
this desire to interest readers is behind the whole question of news values .
have human values become self-supporting and self-justifying ?
the lower values in both characters correspond to the lighter coloured stones used in jewellery ; the black stones , as might be expected from their relative richness in iron , are the densest .
to use this type of model , parameter values for tk processes need to be obtained first .
most tables of figures which show the various physical properties of woods , give averages only , not absolute values .
most mathematicians , including recursion theorists , use the term " domain of f " for the set x ' of all values x such that f ( x ) is defined .
land values : how created by the community , 40-47 ; increase of , 83-86 ; taxation of , 117-130 .
internally , these systems did ones ' complement math so numbers would have to be converted to ones ' complement values when they were transmitted from a register to the math unit and then converted back to sign-magnitude when the result was transmitted back to the register .
h are various values based on the kinematic viscosity at available in astm d2270 .
grothendieck 's crystalline cohomology theory gets around this obstruction because it takes values in the ring of witt vectors over the ground field .
conversions , " converted values should use a level of precision similar to that of the source value , so the moon is 380,000 kilometres ( 240,000 mi ) from earth , not ( 236,121 mi ) .
general factors in depreciation of residence property apart from any racial influence there are many causes of depreciation in property values , the responsibility for all of which has often been thoughtlessly placed upon negroes .
the value for does not exactly match one of the predefined values .
the conclusion come to is that , for assigned limits of x , between 0 and a , say , and for the assigned values of the function , f ( x ) can be expressed either as a series of sines or as a series of cosines .
he has kindly returned the following strong testimonial in favor of the dissertation , which can not but secure it a wide circulation , and the attentive perusal of every man who values health .
in computers , the component values are often stored as integer numbers in the range 0 to 255 , the range that a single 8-bit byte can offer .
bucket 2 contains values 3 through 8 .
in the process of painting the infinite play and by-play of opposed values on a given theatre , they produced form as an inevitable result .
k corresponding to all possible values of f ' ( e ) , and it is found that the closed-loop system is stable for all such k , then it intuitively clear that the system must be monostable ; i .
compare this to the basic 2 x 4 wooden stud wall , and 2 x 6 foam insulated and sheathed wall with r values of 15 .
their influence , founded as it is on money values , is not beneficial to hamilton college .
the goal is to cause change in attitudes and behaviour in society by assessing the current situation of justice and promoting values such as peace , democracy and solidarity in spain , africa , asia and latin america .
it also aims to promote the values exemplified by the two founding fathers .
the judicious dom calmet values this sum at four hundred and forty-eight livres , six sous , nine deniers , according to the ancient calculation adopted at random , in which the silver mark was of six-and-twenty livres value .
it was that there are no values in nature ; virtues and values are assigned to objects and actions by human beings .
fourteen values were prepared but none were issued .
other peoples.=—hungarians , roumanians , portuguese , bulgarians , lithuanians , estonians , and latvians bring ideas , labor , fine traditions , and esthetic values .
the second operation is to delete x from t , and to walk on the path from x to x _ 0 , correcting h _ v and c _ v values .
“ he 's beginning to learn , however , about my voting those three hundred wenches in overalls and jumpers , do n't y ' know , and it has taught him to distrust my methods as lacking that element of conservatism which he values so much .
possibly a change in the methods of the use of wood may also change the relative economic values , but at present the vast forests of the tropical countries are of relatively little importance in the discussion of wood supply for the world .
this analysis of the world 's collective values and their ascription to a certain '' will to power '' may now seem to many but an exhaustive attempt at a new system of nomenclature , and little else .
[ 151 ] [ the sextarius was accorded different values , thus a sextary of oil was ℥xviij , of wine ℥xx , and of honey , ℥xvij.—e .
between the memory of great past values and the contemporary world , which is incapable of establishing its own values , our painter , so extravagant with time , stubbornly and miserly saves up death in life , and installs himself comfortably as occupying an uninhabited plot of land .
iv in what setting , then , are we to place morality so that these “ denaturalised ” values may be retained ?
typically , a fold is presented with a combining function , a top node of a data structure , and possibly some default values to be used under certain conditions .
_but withal there is no zenith of values , _ but only a zenith of _power._ 181 man has one terrible and fundamental wish ; he desires power , and this impulse , which is called freedom , must be the longest restrained .
the following graphs compare the standard logistic distribution with the student 's t distribution that matches the first four moments using the above-determined values , as well as the normal distribution that matches the first two moments .
typical values of z0 are 50 or 75 ohms for a coaxial cable , about 100 ohms for a twisted pair of wires , and about 300 ohms for a common type of untwisted pair used in radio transmission .
there are , beyond all sectional over-personal ideals , values which connote the highest welfare of everyone `` who carries a human face . ''
opening her chambers ’ sacred doors , of all her treasured mantles there , let her select the widest , most magnificently wrought,110 and which she values most ; _that_ let her spread on athenæan pallas ’ lap divine .
howe , malverd a. : wood in compression ; bearing values for inclined cuts .
as a liberal democratic country , thailand supports and highly values freedom of expression which is a fundamental right guaranteed in section 45 of the constitution .
after his election crime rose and property values declined throughout compton .
it is used to define dynamic values for tags and component properties .
note that so far , only local pittsburgh historic designations are thoroughly documented with wikipedia articles , so those designations are the only other available values for this parameter .
government has yet to elaborate measures to address wage discrimination and disparities between job values in the private and public sectors .
the stakes then , on both sides , large as they had seemed , were infinitely smaller than the values at issue now .
the magazine 's founder bob guccione wanted to produce an explicit adult film within a feature film narrative that had high production values ; he decided to produce a film about the rise and fall of the roman emperor caligula .
men were indifferent to stock quotations , but they rated spiritual values high .
different amounts of memory are used to store data values with different degrees of precision .
he came under the influence of lecocq de boisbaudran , who was occupied with the study of values , effects of night , and training of memory .
i 'm just _honing_ to see him to tell him that if he values his health he 'll drop that scheme at the close of the year , which closes to-day . ''
once the sort type is fixed at the start of a sort the presence of alphabetic values in subsequent rows is ignored .
the sequential organ failure assessment ( sofa ) score uses early lab values in a patient 's hospitalization ( within 24 hours ) to predict fatal outcomes for a patient .
it does all this , but in addition it is liberalized throughout by translation into its historic values and scientific equivalencies .
indeed - it is dangerous to apply modern western culture values onto other times and other places .
when mind has thus been trained to look for esthetic values , even where the practical side of the thing is paramount , it becomes able to enjoy esthetically even that which in no way directly suggests an esthetic attitude of the spectator .
like the church , he may gamble in land values to his heart 's content .
which connects different attitudes to one another and to more underlying psychological structures , such as values or ideology .
now a function that creates a new bill object could pass two values into the constructor and set the data members in one step .
up to the present the following values have been found : -- 3 stivers black 5 `` `` 5 `` red 6 `` black 6 `` `` { _double_ ; that is to say , two stamps { of 6 stivers side by side .
it is a powerful work of strong colour , broad design and intense sentiment , astounding in its _parti-pris_ of reducing the values to the greatest simplicity .
for assessing the accuracy of āryabhaṭa 's computations , the modern values of jyas are given in the last column of the table .
it need not be a person ; a group , an institution , a doctrine , any organized form of life will do ; and that it be conscious of the values that motivates it is not at all essential .
often the time domain samples are treated as real values by an ft because we ignore ( set to zero ) their imaginary components .
subtracting the 14 from these three values , we have the series of 0 , 12 , 17 .
during the time when most of us acquire a practical sense , get a half-unconscious knowledge of hard facts and market values , he had been shut away from the world , fed like the pigeons in the bell-tower of his monastery .
the values of the academy are fairness , ambition and respect .
the decisions and the realizations of exogenous uncertainty determine the values of the state variables in the next sequential time period .
as a poet avakumović came to hold definite theories of purposes and values of poetics and orthography , which he set forth in poems collected after his death in pesme jovana avakumovića ( poems of jovan avakumović ) .
due to the use of perturbation theory in defining the interaction matrix , the above assumes small values of h ' or , shallow defect states close to band edges .
dynamic random access memorythe table below shows values for pc memory module types .
a true artist employs his medium as an instrument of expression ; and he values his own technical skill in the handling of it according to the measure that he is enabled thereby to express himself more effectively .
however , this can be expensive to compute , especially on slow processors , and there are many applications , particularly in traditional computer graphics , that need to compute many thousands of sine values every second .
the combinations are chosen to ensure that the thermal expectation values of normal ordered products are always zero so the split chosen will depend on the temperature .
either his life must be given for the imperishable values of spiritual existence or for the meats that perish and the flesh that will see corruption .
across 112 pages he outlines chapters on realm of light , being of light , renunion , universal knowledge , ineffability , the soul , immortality , the transformation of values that results and compares these with scriptural references of the religion .
when small pieces are selected for test they very often are clear and straight-grained , and thus of so much better grade than the large sticks that tests upon them may not yield unit values applicable to the larger sizes .
the transformation of actual products into exchange values is self-evident with him and the only question is as to finding a quantitative measure of value .
in south australia the first tax on unimproved land values was imposed .
the work can appear moralizing at points , perhaps implicitly comparing the values of germanic tribes and those of his roman contemporaries , although any direct comparison between rome and germania is not explicitly presented in the text .
it should be noted that the derived equations above will always underestimate actual flow since both the derived c and n values are lower than their respective chart values .
this separation of values must cease .
the growth of protestant teaching about the bible has necessarily been complicated but we must recognize that protestant theology and protestant tradition have given the bible what one may call read-in values .
to price assets , consequently , the calculated expected values need to be adjusted for an investor 's risk preferences ( see also sharpe ratio ) .
merv 12 and all smaller merv values .
the purpose of all art is the objectification of values .
we hear a great deal said now , and said unthinkingly , about the personal values not counting in a war that is fought for world freedom .
since the purpose is study rather than personal gratification or display , a reference collection values damaged objects as much as the pristine ; in fact , organizations maintaining reference collections will encourage members to donate their damaged or poor-condition items to the collection .
wikipedia values contributions from everyone , novices and non-experts alike .
the whole tendency hitherto has been to force the money values of stamps into prominence , and naturally this has attracted the attention of speculators .
special departmental requisition for material ] stores records may be divided into two classes──one recording both quantities and values , and one recording quantities only .
on the contrary , every one is conscious that , when any one is held up to him as a model of virtue , he compares this so-called model with the true original which he possesses in his own mind and values him according to this standard .
it 's just as simple as not being able to collaborate with an institution whose core values conflict with our own .
[ 114 ] the values of shipments by law established were little regarded .
inserting these values in our general equation and calculating the result , we obtain 18.1e−6 as the value of the constant .
the order of events has been carefully considered ; and follows that of the best authorities , accepting as historical _all_ the four gospels and _all_ their contents ; raising no questions concerning miracles or the relative values of different portions of the record .
i was not surprised , then , when joe , who has been long enough in civilized lands to know what values are , came to me and said he thought it was wrong to rob these people .
these values include democracy , freedom , equality , diversity , peace , love , reconciliation , and respect .
when we are taught to read , first we learn off the names of the letters , then their forms and their values , then in due course syllables and their modifications , and finally words and their properties , viz .
relative values emerged .
the boarding schools , which inculcated their own values , became an effective way to encourage local people to share british ideals , and so help the british achieve their imperial goals .
as the embodiments of the ideals just mentioned , the gods are always pictured by the mythological imagination in human form , since it is only his own characteristics that man can conceive as magnified into the highest values in so absolute a sense .
for nearly a century , the same ymca served as an outlet for youthful energy as boys learned the values of teamwork and respect for authority through athletics , field trips , and instructional classes .
they are more free from class or institutional control than other social values .
humanism as thus an appreciation of fundamental values in life by feeling rather than by principle , belongs to the deeper currents of life , those that flow in the subconscious -- it is close to instinct , to moods , and the religious and the aesthetic experiences .
he equivocates and hesitates over the defence of the values of a conservative culture , virginity , true devotion , strict moral probity .
is it not true after all that if i give up the comforts , or let me say the helps to the maintenance of the higher values , i should be saving the lives of many children ?
is not this kind of labour , then , the fittest to be the standard by which to measure the values of all other labour , and , consequently , of all other things whose value depends on the labour of making or procuring them ?
the definition is sometimes generalized by allowing the euclidean function to take its values in any well-ordered set ; this weakening does not affect the most important implications of the euclidean property .
securities and real estate values are listed at market value rather than at historical cost or cost basis .
the party describes itself as " a principled , conservative and radically patriotic christian party " , whose " fundamental purpose " was the protection of " hungarian values and interests .
many have criticized the company about flipping upside-down the original values of the company after the deaths of walt disney and roy disney .
people born into a particular culture that grow up absorbing the values and behaviors of the culture will develop a worldview that considers their culture to be the norm .
the calorie is the amount of heat necessary to raise the temperature of one pound of water four degrees f. , or one kilogram one degree c. in this way , the heat values of pure protein , fat , starch , and sugar have been determined .
the user is assisted in element insertion by means of context-specific lists of valid elements and allowed attributes with possible attribute values , and context-sensitive help for elements and attributes .
but the relative values of those two different species of food , bread and butcher 's meat , are very different in the different periods of agriculture .
the civil society in pakistan is largely hierarchical , emphasising local cultural etiquettes and traditional islamic values that govern personal and political life .
despite this , he appreciates certain human values such as courage .
the skittles are of different values , and are numbered as follows ( as shown in the accompanying plan ) .
i learned to recognize colors through his eyes ; i learned to understand form and shape ; most fundamental of all , i learned his values , his attitudes , his tastes .
his sense of tactile values is profound .
we were both high-spirited , both too young to understand life ’ s values or the emotions which swayed us , and both too proud to yield the first .
wikipedia visiting scholars will be interacting with libraries and scholars at a university as one of the few representatives of the wikipedia community that they will ever contact and will provide evidence to the partner of the community 's values and strengths .
the belief system takes its name from the circassian epic adyghe habze , originally orally transmitted , which has heavily contributed to the shaping of adyghe values over the centuries .
this range covers the values of silicate minerals such as olivine and pyroxene , which dominate the rocky objects of the solar system , suggesting that the bulk of haumea is rock , covered with a relatively thin layer of ice .
| | values .
what meaning can there be in applying these notions to a case in which they are not applicable , in which their values are not determinable ?
if one has trained one ’ s eye to detect the symptoms of decline , one also understands morality , —one understands what lies concealed beneath its holiest names and tables of values : _e.g._ , _impoverished_ life , the will to nonentity , great exhaustion .
people who came back to the wilderness always seemed to be coming back to the source of things and finding spiritual values that lay only at the source .
as memory runs much more slowly than the cpu , in order to maximize performance , modern cpu designs include a number of high-speed memory elements to temporarily store values and avoid the delays inherent to talking to main memory .
there are several situations in which the proportions of phenotypes observed in the progeny do not match the predicted values .
most important , albright argues that politics and religious values can work together to promote peace .
instead of manually specifying the values of this field , it can be given as the solution to a field equation .
[ 24 ] at present values `` worth about £12,000. '' -- hodgkin .
any intermediate values need to be cautiously interpreted and a corticotropin-releasing hormone ( crh ) test is advised in order to confirm corticotropin dependency .
there must be some clearing-house of intelligence and of values in this country , some place from which our intelligence may start and to which it may return .
unlike the starter kit and songwriter edition , the maestro edition supports note values up to 64th-notes and can export notation to a bmp or tiff picture file .
but the streak of feminine divination bob had inherited from his mother made him understand -- or made him think to understand -- that baker 's satisfaction was taken because he did not see , while thorne was working with his eyes open and a full sense of values .
he was reviewing the final adventure of his life with no changed sense of values , no blurred outlook .
* * * * * there is one thing i learn day by day in my strollings about town , and that is that nobody is going to give me dollar values for half-dollar equivalents .
but when we play the game of death , things are our counters -- guns , rivers , shells , bread , roads , forests , ships -- and in totting up the values of these my friend hunter-weston has very few equals in the army .
the values of ν found in the table of optical glasses are still more narrowly restricted , lying between 67 and 29 , while such a mineral as fluorite shows a value of 95·4 .
nof functions the same as this template , but with the base and primary values reversed .
[ 139 ] an analogue in the field of social values is readily suggested .
in this case the six values become three and three equal , so that only two different values remain .
hii values range from 0 to 64 .
the expression of a man who , all at once , sees the thing he values more than anything in the whole world being torn from him -- dragged forcibly away from the shelter he could give into some unspeakable darkness of disaster .
the method of using such a table in calculating the values of life contingencies was also discovered by dr halley .
the education of an individual is not estimated alone by the degree to which he succeeds in practical affairs , but as well by the extent to which he shows evidence of training in the appreciation of moral , artistic , and literary values .
saber has noted , that they are able to maintain high production and design values while taking advantage of russia 's vast computer science , artistic rendering , and fine art talent pool while reducing costs of game development .
when the windows are hung with soft colored brocade , the portières are usually beautiful tapestry or rich toned velvets , and care is always taken to have the balance of color kept and the color values correct .
l 'hopital 's rule and by inspection ) , and both values depend critically on the very multiplicative constants big o notation explicitly discards .
money may have added to its capital value the value that is created by _one_ marginal exchange , but the whole series of values which a dollar may create in exchanges can not be capitalized , if only because the same owner can not get them all .
“ it was because she esteems and values me , -- because she regards me as a brother , and -- i am not a vain man -- and could not bear -- those were her very words -- to cheat me of my affection for even an hour !
l ) bound on the absolute value of intermediate values needed .
when precipitable water values near , brief but often torrential thunderstorms can occur , especially over mountainous terrain .
free from effectism , dealing only with inner values of the heart and morals , _el abuelo_ can properly rank as one of the masterpieces of modern drama .
but such radical criticism may for the moment be put aside ; later on we shall discuss what may be the relative values of the wise-men ’ s words and works .
the talk drifted into a discussion of relative values and prospects , and when thode cantered down the driveway an hour or so later he had secured a good working knowledge of the surrounding country with which to commence his labors .
`` his type of mind was essentially scientific , and combined with this type of mind there was a rare quality of critical faculty in relation to the relative practical values of horticultural ideas and methods .
for values , after all , are not outward , but inward : not material , but spiritual .
a multitude of the labourers are seduced from the production of those more essential values , by the higher prices which luxury and pride are enabled to pay for their objects .
the values on the pulse rise time refer to the rated voltage .
these simpler models allow the typical values of a quantity being modelled to be related to whatever explanatory variables are available .
fuel values of nutrients. -- in experiments performed by professor atwater and others , and in the appended tables , the value of food as a source of energy is stated in heat units called _calories_ .
signed magnitude is the most common way of representing the significand in floating point values .
every colorist knows that the whole secret of beauty and brilliance dwells in a proper understanding and adjustment of values , and music is powerless to help him here .
so after having performed data cleansing and achieving a data collection free of errors , one would want to avoid the re-cleansing of data in its entirety after some values in data collection change .
as in the rest of the language , the object system has first-class values and lexical scope is used to control access to objects and methods .
subject " indices will be indicated using letters a , b and c , with values running from 1 to n _ a which is equal to 10 in the above example .
considered a function of nonnegative integer values of k it is the discrete poisson distribution function , while considered a function of nonnegative real values of λ is is the continuous gamma distribution density function .
the esm is a microcomputer that records the absolute switching values of the primary controller and also measures the ' rate of change ' of both the rise and fall of temperatures during the operating cycle of the compressors .
benan aapan auchi nee han ) , value-based education , adherence to moral values , constructive philosophies of life , and observance of yogic practices .
in december 2008 , virant was elected chairman of the rally for the republic ( ) , a civic platform founded in 2004 to promote classical liberal , patriotic , republican , and liberal-conservative values in slovenian public life .
whatever malignant poison had seeped into the collective brain of the nation , it was certainly a devastating leveler of all sorts of institutions and values .
but it means that again we have relinquished those values which have made jesus the heart of humanity .
heretofore such observations were isolated and of no general value , but now , by the tables completed by mr. glaisher , and published by the royal society , they may all be converted into scientific values , and be made available for the increase of our weather-wisdom .
this could be seen as a reason that the artistic and cultural products of the harlem renaissance did not overcome the presence of white-american values , and did not reject these values .
for section c , there is a short story that contains some moral values .
tracing change ) the first part provides a basic understanding of emancipative values .
25 _a._ tabular sales book ] in certain lines of business a record of quantities of different kinds of merchandise sold is of almost equal value to records of values .
positive log-ratios indicate a region of dna copy number gain and negative log-ratio values mark a region of dna copy number loss .
the rise in values was so rapid that a corner lot costing in 1851 thirty dollars , and worth in 1860 $ 300 a front foot , increased by 1870 to $ 500 and by 1880 to $ 1,000 a front foot .
if the two tasks for which the heps are known are incorporated in the task set which is undergoing quantification then the equation parameters can be determined by using the method of simultaneous equations ; using the result of this the unknown hep values can thus be quantified .
their position on the board gave them their values .
the anzac tradition holds many values for us all to celebrate , but the myth also suppresses parts of australian history that are difficult to deal with .
`` yes , '' he answers , '' but those values may now be found in the cosmopolitan civilization of america . ''
the purpose of the association was to develop a culture of leadership based on values .
in at least one work of fiction , however , the impression is conveyed that the latter firm from the first enjoyed the monopoly of stamp production of all values .
in a pc-secure program , the execution path does not depend on secret values .
his autobiography records these achievements and values and habits which made them possible , and tells how a remarkable human being used his heritage and created a life on a new , revolutionary model .
the customary objection is that those conditions which are the _raison d'etre_ of the skyscraper -- high land values and congestion at transportation centers -- are decidedly absent in bismarck .
such standards may be designed to protect human health and comfort , and environmental values .
and he had only put things down at par values .
benedict showed that approximate values for bmr could be derived using body surface area ( computed from height and weight ) , age , and sex , along with the oxygen and carbon dioxide measures taken from calorimetry .
an explicit discussion of educational values thus affords an opportunity for reviewing the prior discussion of aims and interests on one hand and of the curriculum on the other , by bringing them into connection with one another .
man soon became proud of himself as a being who measures values .
the solid electrolyte ensures low esr values , and a stable electrical behavior over a broad temperature range .
if the spiritual life can thus grow towards perfection , undisturbed by human aims , it will manifest all its values in rich and pure abundance ; it will reveal a new world , and will open up a new depth of reality .
there are resistances , it is true , but these express themselves at first only in tantrums , in apparently quite meaningless outbreaks ; we impose our phrases and values so completely , that such spasmodic opposition seems to signify nothing .
exploiting the well-known relation of separability which links the wavenumbers in the various directions and the frequency , it is possible to obtain the values of the longitudinal propagation constant kz for the various modes .
so , the average number of comparisons for randomized quicksort equals the average cost of constructing a bst when the values inserted ( x _ 1 , x _ 2 , .
the traditional way to identify foam index values is by visual observation .
thus eda rawle was brought in contact with values she herself was powerless to detect , and which did not become values until they had passed through janet .
[ 82 ] i have shown that the same is true of the austrian attempt to reduce values to terms of individual utilities .
moreover , the behavior of the fourier series at points of discontinuity is determined as well ( it is the midpoint of the values of the discontinuity ) .
a hard heart that values nothing is the only wear , and 't is evident scripture so enjoins it .
if this be so , and compulsory funding be adopted , there will soon be no redundancy of paper money , and a magical change of values will take place .
so far as the ethical values are concerned , the latter title is alone justified .
he used diluted plasma or serum as the perfusate and pointed out the necessity for low perfusate pressures to prevent kidney swelling , but admitted that the optimum values for such variables as perfusate temperature , po2 , and flow , remained unknown .
these , together with values of [ m ] ² [ n ] for cylindrical rods , and of n and [ m ] ²n for ellipsoids of revolution , are given in the following useful table ( _loc .
the losses due to contact resistance and brush friction are very liable to be greatly increased above the values that may be obtained by the preceding methods , if the commutator and brushes are dirty and rough , or not in good condition .
katy keene featured fashionable young beauty katy ( a model with " traditional values " ) , who had a pestering little sister , a stream of suitors and dreams of becoming an actress .
there is a culture of dining , and an entire way of viewing food-from obtaining raw ingredients to preparation and to eating-that reflects values instilled in the civilization of literacy .
scenes move more easily ; dramatic values become coherent ; characters stand out from the `` chorus '' on the stage .
players can set combat , logistics and air commitment support values to direct the allocation of supplies ; reinforcements and combat support assets .
one must make a difference between the condition and the condition made when choosing the signature ( the signs of the principal values of the gik tensor ) .
the genre helped initiate and later perpetuate a myth of the jordaan , klöters argued , a myth of a world full of poor , hard-working , and fun-loving people who adhere to traditional values .
a sense of belonging to europe , to a community of values , of culture and interests , is essential to forge this common destiny .
asceticism in some form is a permanent element in any wide spread religion and the values later expressed in christian asceticism were in the earlier period mediated through chiliasm .
the kremsmünster ( 42 ) figures show a smaller but still distinct excess in the summer values .
the dielectric constant of the epidermis and the area of the sensing element are known values .
the island is a roaring volcano of fate , of material values , of tariffs , and laws of repression , glutted markets and low prices .
keeping these facts in mind , we can easily see , ” says mr. pieters , “ how a contribution of two dollars , which is quite common here when a church is being built , gives forty-fold measured by standards of values in america .
the unseen values 3 some examples of the unexpected 3 the ultimate values 5 steering a middle road 6 the time for space 7 ii .
this may give varying numerical values depending on the chosen biological effect .
more practically , the expected value of a discrete random variable is the probability-weighted average of all possible values .
feeling great conflict and lost hope , but clinging onto the values of honesty and property , digory turns down her urgings and makes his escape , returning the apple to aslan , who instructs him to plant it by the river .
the reason he values it so is because the printed dedication reads : -- `` _to_ will crooks , l.c.c .
adding the ascii codes of the characters ( this has several variations based on how you treat spaces and newlines ) , and adding the numerals and gematrical values of the letters .
a feature has between two and nine values , shown on the maps by different colours and shapes of the language symbols .
all the camps represent a joint effort on the part of the national park service and the concessionaire to encourage and assist travel beyond the roads , where the visitor may appreciate the wild values of the park which he can hardly observe from the highways .
these parameters involve only the statistical distribution of height values along the z axis .
show five values of red .
willful harm as defined by our values , but in anthropology , you learn to grey the hell out of everything you consider as many things we view are viewed very differently in other cultures .
roughly speaking , this represented an estimate of exchangeable values .
capture technologies also encompass the creation of metadata ( index values ) that describe characteristics of a document for easy location through search technology .
other opponents of the " super slab " project criticized the bill for removing requirements that property owners be informed of planned development ; the requirements had resulted in a decrease in property values for many in the proposed project 's corridor .
if values of gravity at stations of different elevation are to be compared , they must be reduced to the same level , usually to sea level .
depreciating land values for the sake of getting hold of that piece of property the cement company wants to get from the duke . ''
when the assets are entered and posted , the ledger accounts will appear as follows : [ illustration ] these asset accounts represent the value of the individual properties , while the personal estate account represents the combined values of all personal property of the estate ( no .
but the values may be qualitatively incompatible .
commonsense : the ability to detect values -- to know a big thing from a little one .
as the then existing contract expired sept. 11 , 1864 , the post office department entered into a new agreement with nesbitt , paying an advanced rate to the contractor and ordering a change of the dies of the two , three and six cents values .
citric acid is a useful component of a buffer mixture because it has three pka values , separated by less than two .
therefore the ethical environmental values linked to environmental certification can be tracked at all stages along the commodity network from the producer to the retailer .
the corresponding values of x are 17 , 9 and 1 , and y is 7 , 14 or 21 .
a quantity which may increase or decrease ; a quantity which admits of an infinite number of values in the same expression ; a variable quantity ; as , in the equation x2 - y2 = r2 , x and y are variables .
to harley , fresh from other lands , it seemed in the first breath singular , and yet in the second he liked it ; the easy give-and-take promoted the smoothness of life , and men might assume false values , but they were not able to keep them .
214 is measured on a 360° scale from the north point , whereas the azimuth used here ( [ psi ] _ { 0 } ) is measured 180° in either direction from the south point , negative values to the east , positive values to the west .
these might include values such as the email address of the currently logged-in user on a given machine , the current system time and date , or the output value of a function .
the values known through looking at what determines her actual behavior considering how these values correlate with her privilege of calling herself , nurse .
this process continues until all the elected candidates ' vote values closely match the quota ( plus or minus .
the collection , once refined , provided values that could be used in a systematic computer search of the gz database of one million objects , which eventually resulted in a sample of 251 pea galaxies , also known as green peas ( gps ) .
by altering the rate , on the contrary , the proportion between those two values is necessarily altered .
it also points to a new condition of values .
an alternative strategy is to pick values for x and y from a set of feasible values and then test 390 - x2 - y2 to see if it is a square number .
yet that same man , day after day , consumes his own food and sees his children fed , to say nothing of the mother of his children , without ever giving one thought to the nutritive values of that food .
differences in the typical values across the dataset might initially be dealt with by constructing a regression model using certain explanatory variables to relate variations in the typical value to known quantities .
“ about two hundred , and he values them pretty highly , but they ’ re not worth a dollar .
change of values -- that is , change of the creating ones .
as a result , the actuary at the india office forwarded revised tables for the calculation of surrender values of life policies , to be used until the general revision of the mortality tables and of the tables of premia , which had been under contemplation , was effected .
in making resistance measurements of large transformers by the drop method care should be taken to allow both ammeter and voltmeter indications to settle down to steady values before readings are taken .
over against these positive values of property are certain evils which moralists have always recognized , evils both to the property owner and to society .
it is an economic waste , as is intemperance , for even on the level of economic values it is plain that money could be much better spent for that which would benefit rather than curse .
what does nihilism mean ? -- _that the highest values are losing their value._ there is no bourne .
these displacements in phase are received on the earth and then translated back into the codes which indicate the voltage , temperature , intensity , or other values measured by the spacecraft telemetry sensors or scientific instruments .
despite his accomplishments , octavius is revealed to be still haunted by peter parker 's lingering spirit , unable to reassert control over spider-man 's shared body , but actively hampering his efforts to stray from peter 's values , and trying to reclaim his body .
i am gathering these and the alpines into trial-beds , and thus hope to learn more accurately their differences , characteristics and comparative values .
much of the normal development of civilization , for instance , the great scientific advance of the nineteenth century , the spread of culture , the creation of artistic values , the rise in the standard of living , is change of this sort .
performance of a compressor is usually specified by curves of delivery pressure against mass flow rate for various fixed values of rotational speed at given values of inlet pressure and temperature .
sound poetry is an artistic form bridging literary and musical composition , in which the phonetic aspects of human speech are foregrounded instead of more conventional semantic and syntactic values ; " verse without words " .
the values given below are those required for deposition from normal solutions at ordinary temperatures with reference to a hydrogen electrode .
the method gives very accurate results , but it is limited to calculations of random sequences modeled as markov chains of the first order with small values of bias and correlations .
the teaching-relation with young minds has shown me the wonderful values of direct contact .
dietary reference intake values are published by the institute of medicine for general use , but nutrition facts labels in the u .
over the next decade , this movement will encourage church members to adopt the d6 [ 5 ] lifestyle where parents reconnect to their kids and transfer their spiritual heritage and values by regular interaction every day .
while some web sites have reasonably accurate times the other values that are listed do not agree with other web sites or with the equations i have .
but even non-truth-valuational logics can associate values with logical formulae , as is done in algebraic semantics .
most animals can determine numbers in the values 1 through 9 , but recent experiments have discovered that rhesus monkeys can quantify values from 1 up to 30 .
to me my fellow-men are oysters , and i have no oyster-knife ; my sole consolation ( if it be one ) is that my own values absolutely defy the oyster-knives of others .
earlier hard drives used in the pc , such as mfm and rll drives , divided each cylinder into an equal number of sectors , so the chs values matched the physical properties of the drive .
enlightenment to demonstrate our values are better than theirs .
whole values are not themselves things , but measures of things .
`` to this ball she shall not go , and i charge her not to put on those limerick gloves as she values my blessing , '' said mr. hill .
to analyze the curves in a handle-bar , and their different lever values , would be difficult .
“ it is not a diamond , only an imitation , ” he said , “ but my wife values it as the gift of a friend .
for more accurate etr values , the leaf absorption value and the ratio of psii reaction centers to psi reaction centers can be included in the equation .
i offered to keep her posted as to the general tendency of values on the bourse and the financial situation .
in 1875 the values rose about 15 per cent .
what was the result of this confusion of heterogeneous doctrines whose multiplicity was extreme and whose values were very different ?
in addition it is a useful descriptive statistic since it is sensitive to the larger values in a set .
is too low an estimate of the ratio of land values to entire real estate values .
since what they have done is only material for what we may do , it can not of itself explain our use of it , or judge our own values .
i think the election result when it comes to values is very important for europe .
economists and some ecologists concentrate on ecosystem services and the assignment of values in a service economy to all that nature does " for humans " ( a basic form of instrumentalism ) .
the approximate relative values in the london market are as follows : —maryland , fine yellow , fine , and good coloured , 7–9½_d._ a lb .
ronald has followed his roadmap to become a person deeply engaged in youth development with a sole aim of imputing values into young people that model them into leaders in touch with the 21st century problems .
the mean of the 24 hourly numerical values of the resultant current for each month of the year a deducible from weinstein 's data -- the unit being the same as before -- are given in table ii .
english translation of the title ) martinelli proves an earlier result of luigi amoroso on the boundary values of pluriharmonic function by using tensor calculus .
an analysis of the control quality characteristic oscillations caused by the varying of the parameters makes it possible to figure out if the parameters have optimum values , i .
here , prosocial is a genuine cultivation of social interactions based on higher values .
the story is about a simple man with high moral values .
in decimal or binary , integer values and terminating fractions have multiple representations .
hypocrisy , which church-christianity brought in , hardly existed ; the naturalistic system held firm ; its values showed no hollowness and brooked no irony .
using the key thus obtained , sayce enlarged his list of supposed sign-values and in 1884 and 1885 published as known the values of thirty-two hittite signs .
tool records.= while the system described above furnishes a complete check on the tools , it should be supplemented by a record which will serve as a perpetual record of values .
thus , in the homeric poems , we find indications that cattle served as a measure of values , even though payments were made in gold .
the state values these internal reports because they contain much of china 's most sensitive , controversial , and high-quality investigative journalism .
nor are they treated as instruments to the welfare of the private owners who do get the socially created land values ; for they expend neither time nor labour in the interest of the latter directly .
the true saturation or equilibrium between the solution and pure oxygen is nearly five times this value , and consequently values in excess of 100 per cent saturation frequently occur in the presence of oxygen-forming plants .
the mind , decoyed by thoughts that grind and tear away old values , is sent down other thoughts so subtly swift , that in their fleeting passage they can cut adrift our souls upon a sea of wonder and of fear .
in call by value , one can thus think of arguments as values ( properly , think of the value of arguments as the " arguments " themselves ) , but in general arguments are not simply values .
the fact that every person has a real personal value and an accredited worldly value , and that most effort is directed to making these two values coincide , or appear to do so , put a convenient weapon in her hand .
as many unities must be reckoned on the initial consonant as there are values in the word .
if more people join the first emigrant , housing values drop , and this becomes a self-fulfilling prophecy .
coming home from boarding-school , the stars half thrilled her with mystical trailing blossoms of a home-sky , but now of late , after college and a new sense of values , these stars had suddenly ceased throwing their soft lights across the panes .
in this latter , where the pieces have different and _bizarre_ motions , with various and variable values , what is only complex is mistaken ( a not unusual error ) for what is profound .
it is not easy to determine exact values either in the subject studied or in the accomplishment of the student .
cantor , who knew kantorowicz at princeton , suggested that , but for his jewish heritage , kantorowicz ( at least as a young scholar in the 1920s and 1930s ) could be considered a nazi in terms of his intellectual temperament and cultural values .
manning 's reluctance to allow his party to wholly embrace socially conservative values contributed to his deposition as leader of the new canadian alliance in favour of stockwell day .
nor was he a fighting dog ; but once attacked , he lacked a sense of values , being unable to distinguish between dogs that he could beat and dogs with whom he had `` no earthly . ''
he loses his best friend there but finds the love of his life , and what she gives him he treasures and values more than all the wealth he has ever had .
if he implies anything at all he implies a `` transvaluation of all values . ''
the other two kinds of service have never been reduced to monetary values .
you made them ridiculous in the esteem of all persons with a just perception of values .
the peculiar form which commodities lend to their exchange values is transformed into a _money-denomination_ by which commodities tell each other how much they are worth .
the war , he thought , was the great test of characters , it revised all values , and tried out friendships .
it follows from theorem 1 on page 1392 of that there are 100 values of a ( mod 341 ) for which 341 is a pseudoprime base a .
the first stamp depicting faisal i of iraq was a 1-rupee value in 1927 , followed in 1931 by a series of 13 values .
enough has been said to give an idea of the capabilities and values of this new form of fuel , -- at least , and as far as the united states is concerned .
the fourth column shows the tax for values of $ 40 and multiples of ten , to $ 600 .
specifically , given measurements at regular intervals ( half-hourly is usual in nz ) , as were used to produce the plots of generation , sort a year 's 17520 values into the order lowest power to highest .
we considered this more a case of legality of title than coal values .
criteria for performance excellence , core values and concepts , and scoring guidelines .
as naypes or naipes is still the name printed on the wrappers and on the four of cups of spanish cards , it evidently was connected with prophesy , and this card has peculiar values and significances among the gypsy fortune-tellers .
articles such as economy of chile have chosen to express nearly all values in us dollar equivalents ( and do not quote any amounts in chilean currency ) .
table 42 approximate safe working values of _c_ in the expression _w_ = _cwb_^2 from bulletin no .
shelley is a naturalist , too , not in the realm of sordid values but of arcadian fancy .
they could not distinguish values because their critical attitude enveloped all moral notions or made them isolated points without coherent significance .
the text recalls the history of czech statehood and goes on to declare the basic values of the state , mentioning democracy and , thanks to havel , the " civic society " .
this is the first record where tom started using effects processors in such a way that values for the available parameters would all vary as the piece progressed .
“ if a man values a woman , ” said mr. clarence , lounging back in the arm-chair , “ he must be prepared to make sacrifices for her .
they were rated at definite values .
hence , the subsequent recovery of the indigenous population of these islands , along with the continuity of linguistic and cultural values that they still exhibit , can be described as nothing less than remarkable .
canada , where the people are ethnically diverse , social unity is primarily based on common social values and beliefs .
as judgment is a product of education , so judging values is an adult function ; the adult must study all stories , but not tell all stories .
grant us , o god , this day , vitality of brain and heart , to lay hold on the ordinary events and experiences of life , and transmute them into beautiful and permanent values for ourselves and others .
save in extreme circumstances , no increase of the family wage can balance these losses , whose values stand upon a higher qualitative level '' ( j.a .
a salt hydrate in contact with vapour constitutes only a bivariant system , and can exist therefore at different values of temperature and pressure of vapour , as is seen from the diagram , fig .
| | maximum |_f_ | 16.1 minimum |_f_ | 7.9 ======================================================================== footnotes : [ footnote e : giving maximum values of percentage , _f_ . ]
when mean values are subtracted from signals before computing an autocorrelation function , the resulting function is usually called an auto-covariance function .
in several tables with dollar.cent values the decimal point is faint or missing .
in computer science , cycle detection is the algorithmic problem of finding a cycle in a sequence of iterated function values .
but it is the internal economy of the body that counts for most in estimating values .
the english investor , knowing nothing about canadian acreage values and still more ignorant about the actual value of lots offered to him on this particular acreage investment proposition , should not risk his money without expert advice from the district .
he had a remarkable share of what is called the `` yankee '' nature , which values and appreciates material good .
we have had _everything_ to learn from you in methods , but that should not be confused with spiritual values .
pi claims to seek political dialogue and moderation , rejecting what it considers dogmatism and political posturing , while defining its own values as centrist and autonomist .
it comprises the cases in which though we have no à priori knowledge as to the situation about which the values will tend to cluster in the long run , yet we have sufficient experience at hand to assign it with practical certainty .
the state is charged with the protection of the civilizational values ( liberty , equality , comradeship , compassion , democracy , education , the family , religion , rule of law , human and civil rights , etc .
among these , his papers in the _philosophical transactions_ on “ life insurance ” and on the “ proper method of calculating the values of contingent reversions , ” are specially noteworthy .
these future cash flows are discounting used present values .
clearly enough , a powerful continuing body of opinion cares about something more than strictly functional values along the potomac and in its basin .
how much would this change increase the present rate of land taxes , and decrease existing land values ?
the buffer regions carry the information necessary to get the pka values as the concentrations of acid and conjugate base change along a buffer region .
at this point is begun the transvaluation of values which was to have been completed in `` the will to power . ''
german pap generally advises to rely on existing numbers , but allows to fall back on empirical values and experience when needed .
but though it was in his blood , it never blinded his sense of literary values or restrained his sallies at the expense of his demented fellows .
borrowing from highlights for children and other children 's magazines , academy earth attempts to instill ethics into young readers , not by direct means , but by featuring stories that exhibit moral values .
the moments of discontinuity correspond to threshold values in the scale of human activity .
it 's kind of a crazy movie but the production values are pretty good and it sort of holds together .
thus the same character may not only represent the phonetic values _kur_ , _mat_ , _nat_ , _lat_ , _sat_ , and _gin_ ; it may also denote the ideas of “ country , ” “ mountain , ” and “ conquest. ” but this was not all .
how much has the church done to foster the worldly spirit that values gifts by what they are in men's sight , in forgetfulness of what they are to him that searches the heart .
that the economic interpretation of the other fields has much to commend it is certain , but it is equally certain that law and morality react on economic values , especially in the higher stages of civilization .
how different is the mind of him whose deeds themselves are told , who values worth more nobler far than all the heaps of gold .
this is due to the fact that there are numerous factors entering into the problem which affect the saving possible to a much greater extent than do the relative calorific values of two fuels .
but the calm , sound , and most british briton shrinks from public life , as charlatanism , and respects an economy founded on agriculture , coal-mines , manufactures , or trade , which secures an independence through the creation of real values .
set in ethiopia and germany , the film chronicles the return of an ethiopian intellectual to his country of birth during the repressive marxist regime of mengistu haile mariam and the recognition of his own displacement and powerlessness at the dissolution of his people 's humanity and social values .
since this is still measuring the same portion of the sample , just in the opposite direction , the values of rvertical and rhorizontal can still be calculated as the averages of the standard and reversed polarity measurements .
the basic inside the loop functions are reasonably simple , and the complications arise when starting off , trying to minimize latency , changing or selecting the values ( for multiplication ) to use , in the optimum way , timing synchronisation .
in this , the natural clustering or grouping of the pixel values i .
hemingway thought he lost touch with american values while living in paris , but his biographer michael reynolds claims the opposite , seeing evidence of the author 's midwestern american values in the novel .
because the lists are constructed incrementally , the first array in the array list may not contain twice as many values as the next one , although the rest do ; this does not significantly impact indexing performance .
nevertheless , her values and causes were so unusually progressive for the era in which she lived , that it was to be decades before they became widely accepted ( especially in south africa ) , and her role in propagating them was largely forgotten .
a mathematically equivalent method is to convolve one sinc function with a series of dirac delta pulses , weighted by the sample values .
most women come to the duty of providing for a family utterly ignorant of the science of comparative values , and of the greater or less economies of the articles they are to provide and preserve .
the strength of each was impressive , yet this mr. brooks seemed to me the bodily presentment of a set of values which i would have kept constantly before my eyes ... .
some high performance permanent psas exhibit high adhesion values and can support kilograms of weight per square centimeter of contact area , even at elevated temperatures .
vermeir and verbeke ( 2006 ) argue that consumers are passive with regard to sustainable consumption , and work within their budget rather than following their values .
in the _iliad_ , the respective values of two shields are stated in head of cattle , and the roman word for moneys , _pecunia_ , is derived from _pecus_ , cattle .
the claim for universal values can be understood in two different ways .
one criterion uses the magnitude of the tan δ value as a tool for diagnostics while the other uses the difference in tan δ values for particular electrical stresses or voltage levels .
if < it > x < /it > be a symbol to which different numerical values can be assigned , such expressions as x < exp > 2 < /exp > , 3 < exp > x < /exp > , log .
from a crude and sexless hoyden , she has evolved into an exquisite complexity ; invested all round with higher values , human and psychical .
the same may also be deduced from the different values of the moon 's mass as derived from different phenomena , dependent on the law of gravitation .
legitimate and illegitimate behaviors both express the same general needs and essential values .
from their experiments , the authors concluded that when individuals act mindfully , their actions are consistent with their values and interest .
however , comparing the erm and pdm ratios between the values of two coincident or almost coincident alternatives normally indicates which should be preferred .
not infrequently a tool 's style , decorative motif , or similarity to other objects that coexisted at a given time can suggest , even in relatively modern times , the values of the society that produced it .
wikipedia to seem like a snooty elitist site that only values regular members either .
from the intimate spiritual contact between two differentiated personalities , the highest spiritual values proceed .
the length of the weir is determined by substituting these values in the formula .
gregarious and charming , sciascia epitomized traditional cosa nostra values .
on three west australian gold mines , in records covering a period of over two years , where sampling was most exhaustive as a daily régime of the mines , the values indicated by sampling were 12 % higher than the mill yield plus the contents of the residues .
the results of selective breeding were evident in the relationship between breeding values and their accuracy .
fi is the polynomial whose coefficients are the absolute values of those of fi ( this follows directly from the definition of i _ i ( s ) ) .
for instance , teenagers might follow the values and roles of their parents or cultural norms .
if the terms depend upon a complex variable z , the convergence is called _uniform_ for a range of values of z , when the inequality holds , for the same [ epsilon ] and m , for all the points z of this range .
it may lessen the value of real estate on the principal streets in large cities , and fall in values is not certain even there .
two values , historic examples . ]
arundo donax showed greater values than tilled management system for total soil organic carbon , light fraction carbon , dissolved organic carbon , and microbial biomass carbon .
transitory life ends for the christian when the balance-sheet of his individual merits and demerits is made up , and the eternity that ensues is the eternal reality of those values .
western values than because of their own traditions .
[ 135 ] the volume of the circulating medium in a country is determined by the value of the unit of measure of money on the one hand , and by the sum total of the exchange values of commodities , on the other .
these attributes may be for example single bits or single scalar values , defining if the subgrids belonging to the nodes are of interest or not .
qualities are an idiosyncrasy proper to human nature ; the demand that these our human interpretations and values , should be general and perhaps real values , belongs to the hereditary madnesses of human pride .
however , although williams in many ways accepted european concepts and values , in october 1896 he sponsored an egungun dance , a traditional ceremony .
the athenaeum generation proposed academic freedom , freedom of thought , and overall the cultural , ethic and aesthetic values in which latin america emerged as a political and social reality .
we have lost our standards , our taste in life : we have lost the very thing by which we recognized that there were such things as spiritual values .
engineering practices and education depended upon cultural values and preferences .
major donors are often mobilised because these projects aim to bring stability , new developments in land markets and transparency of land values to the system .
almost every roumanian has a title derived from one or other source ; he values it highly , and takes it much amiss when a foreigner betrays his ignorance on the subject .
the chief defects in the work are the overcrowding of the composition , and the bad values of distance , caused in a great measure by the gold background .
and now that it is said to be extended over us , no man , in this nation , who values his reputation , will take his bible oath that it is in effectual and legal operation .
every one values health '' above all gold and treasure . ''
we must learn the names and the values and the moves of each piece , and all the rules of the game if we hope to play it successfully .
we believe we 're going to a conference that values both very highly , and we know we can be successful " former loyola ad joe boylan noted that the school had first discussed joining the patriot league in the late 1990s .
perhaps deleting the extra values would fix this .
in the last column of this table the discrepancies between the observed and the calculated values are recorded , for facility of comparison .
figures representing values in shaded numerals on shields , in the upper corners ; values also in sunken letters below , on solid labels bordered by a colorless and colored line , richly ornamented .
it limits the opportunity for deliberate critical observation and comparison that is so essential to the formation of an accurate estimation of values ; it often compels work to be done under such high pressure and such unfavourable conditions that it becomes of little value for educative purposes .
these results are in close agreement with values reported by sherman ( _jour .
all values are in one sense aesthetic 28 § 6 .
statistical coupling energy , denoted δδgi , jstat , is simply the difference between these two values .
when there is a `` sale '' at field 's comparisons of values are not made .
a number of businesses ( also ) joined as community partners and pledged to practice values and bring ethics in business .
communal living , sharing , and living off the land are strong traditional values .
this is accomplished by allowing test variables to depend on observable random vectors as well as their observed values , as in the bayesian treatment of the problem , but without having to treat constant parameters as random variables .
i agree with you that the values are approximate .
for odd values of n , every negative number x has a real negative nth root .
by some it will be felt as an illumination of the mind , which now discerns once for all true values , and accepting these , must uphold and strive for them in the teeth of all opportunism .
i values in the equations above .
similarly , the oecd states that women 's labour market behaviour " is influenced by learned cultural and social values that may be thought to discriminate against women ( and sometimes against men ) by stereotyping certain work and life styles as ' male ' or ' female ' .
7 ) and the values assigned to whorls appearing in those fingers are added together ( 16 plus 2 = 18 ) .
both conservative and liberal groups use economic activism to boycott or " greedily " outbid companies and organizations that do not agree with their particular political , religious , or social values .
although each step is linear in the sampled values and in the position , the interpolation as a whole is not linear but rather quadratic in the sample location .
of the values produced by human industry ; that is , of the changes made in matter by man , that he may appropriate it to his own use , and not at all of nature 's spontaneous productions .
faustina , in spite of her faults , values jewels at their true price .
the highest achieved values are somewhat lower , and the value tends to be lower for smaller , lighter weapons , of the sort that are emphasized in today 's arsenals , designed for efficient mirv use , or delivery by cruise missile systems .
the values and the meaning of everything are to be appreciated and understood , according to this view , through a process of enrichment of the mind under the influence of the highest social ideals expressed in the most persuasive forms .
city of rocks was designated a national reserve , a unit of the national park service , in recognition of the nationally significant geological and scenic values of its rock formations and the historical significance of the california trail .
their dominant interest has been the exclusion of negroes because these associated property owners believe that negroes always depreciate the values of real estate .
he has no sense of values , and i was not much better .
according to vasubandhu , this subsidiary awareness means having no sense of values .
the presence of capital does not at all modify this law , for capital is nothing else than an accumulation of values , of ‹services› , to which is committed the special duty of procuring the co-operation of nature .
service is shared between all non-empty classes in the same ratio as the weight factors ( positive values for each service class ) .
the above table gives values sufficient for practical purposes .
certainly , freedom should not be a code but should emphasize , in every respect , human values .
his revaluation of moral values has not shaken morality to its centre .
but on looking further into the thing , we find that standards are referred to some natural invariable length , and we are at once confronted with a mass of scientific reductions giving different values to the same thing , according to successively improved means of observation .
the simplicity of the calculation was quite a relief to me after the relative values of the english sovereign in the colonies , which had greatly perplexed me : 25_s._ 6_d._ in new brunswick , 25_s._ in nova scotia , and 30_s._ in prince edward island .
i give you my word it has not a single feature in it that he actually values .
so we consider only the first n of these values to be the n eigenvalues of the dirichlet - neumann problem .
the kid rolls his eyes as ashtray lectures him about the values of education .
mais je sais quelles épreuves vous a values votre refus d'épouser m. costeclar , je sais quelle lutte sans merci vous avez soutenue .
within the new healthcare system economic values are dominant .
the lesson of values in life it should be yours to teach , because it should be yours to know and to act .
there was the circumspect , ecclesiastical statesman , out to see that in this grand shaking-up and re-arranging of pre-war positions and values the right cause -- whichever of the right causes was his -- was not jilted or any way wronged .
the auto-correlation function , more properly called the auto-covariance function unless it is normalised in some appropriate fashion , measures the strength of the correlation between the values of f separated by a time-lag .
when moral and intellectual development shall have discredited either its scale of values , or its conviction that cosmical events are in the end determined in accordance with that scale of values , then christianity must either be transformed , or be untenable for the wise man .
they offer a window into the past , providing a glimpse of plantation times , with its simple pleasures and enduring values .
indicating values and relations perhaps the most commonly criticized fault among beginners in speaking is that of monotony .
8 , january 1899 ) whether there may not be different modifications of ice with different densities , and different values of the latent heat of fusion .
rose was conscious of a readjustment of values .
we cannot begin to observe man-made laws if we do not have any moral values to start off with in the first place , " he said .
she stands for truth , justice , and moral values .
by assigning numerical values to all possible attributes , it is convenient to construct a column vector representation of each encoded item .
she had a sudden conception of new values , beside which money counted little .
properties can be either hard coded values or expressions , which are specific expressions that evaluate to a result .
atmospheric temperature range is the numerical difference between the minimum and maximum values of temperature observed in a given location during a period of time ( e .
the values of specific emissions do not reach the average national values .
various methods of arriving at comparative values have been tried , but the figures are very variable , as will be seen by the following tables .
this basic concept is then extended to the cases where the interaction probability in the targeted area assumes intermediate values , because the target itself is not homogeneous , or because the interaction is mediated by a non-uniform field .
you can ’ t kick up a scene on the spur of the moment in the face of such conflicting values as he had before him .
the charter was intended to be a source for national values and national unity .
we can base a decision on rules , or we can base a decision on values .
the stamps of hungary , in the lower values ( _fig._ 260 ) depict the turul , the mythical bird of the magyars , which was said to have been the messenger between them and heaven , and their guide along the road that took them into hungary .
he praised the high production values , " polished " score , courtroom storytelling method , and " almost perfect " casting , but disapproved of the " grim and silly platitudes " of the script and braxton peters 's acting style .
if someone else wants to submit a bot request after the invalid parameter values are removed , they could do so for all instances where the parameter is blank .
the community values stability in its policy and guideline pages ; knowing this , i reverted the change once .
to this i can only reply that the experience of the artist and the teacher is always more reliable , more susceptible to finer appreciations of artistic values than that of the pure theorist , who views his problems through material rather than spiritual eyes .
so , alongside the values of traditional and ancient india , a new professional middle class was starting to arise , in no way bound by the values of the past .
when it comes to historical , mystery , and romantic values , it is perhaps a true mount dora gothic tale comparable to the legend of sleepy hollow .
he started with the ordinary numerical values of the hebrew alphabet .
nothing can teach us a better lesson in this matter of ultimate importance than the habit of mind which allows us to treat the beliefs and values of another man from his point of view .
sylvia was amazed at the total shifting of values .
this rule is silly anyway , as it has no actual values for the hours !
he has one aim , one object -- to get out of prison , and he values only such qualities in himself as will assist his escape .
fifth , although the vocabulary in the textbooks underscores islamic virtues , such as piety , obedience , and submission , little is mentioned about critical thinking , civic participation , or democratic values of freedom of speech , equality , and respect for cultural diversity .
then we come to know the true values of things -- to `` find tongues in trees , books in running brooks , sermons in stones , and good in everything . ''
getting " value " points - another important aspect of this variation is " values " i .
in some foreign words like _cicala_ the _ch-_ ( _tsh_ ) value is given to c. in the transliteration of foreign languages also it receives different values , having that of _tsh_ in the transliteration of sanskrit and of _ts_ in various slavonic dialects .
changes and values arise anew on their own .
why , sir , our values are fixed by a foreign market , and in coin .
the different values of facts , and their grouping into `` points '' _ _extent to which teachers treat facts as equal in value_ in several branches of knowledge in the primary school it is customary for teachers to attach practically the same importance to different facts .
by values is meant the amount of light and shadow contained in a tone .
for example , a person born into a wealthy family characterized by traits such as popularity , talents and high values will have many expectations growing up .
georgia residents ) and strong academic reputation , georgia state university college of law has been honored multiple times as one of the best values in the nation .
however , the known lack of unique values within any of the subarrays places a hard limit on the number of binary searches and rotations that will be performed during this step , which is again items rotated up to times , or o ( n ) .
here a nice adjustment of values or relative tones will accomplish it .
fitch was never profound , never sought to be ; but he was deservedly popular , for he combined no little skill with an alert sense of human values in everyday life , and he brought an artistic conscience to his work .
the next ten years were those of the highest prosperity the building trade of this town has ever known , and the rateable values in 1864 went up to £982,384 , an increase of £326,763 .
realty prices and realty values are two different words that have separate , but similar relations .
a person that values each of the toppings differently ( but does not distinguish between different pieces having the same topping ) has a piecewise constant valuation .
some shells allow completion of argument names , but few support completing values .
this stimulated rapid development of the area and almost doubled land values .
but values other than 21 occur to a small extent in g2a3a persons .
him who breaketh up their tables of values , the breaker , the law-breaker -- he , however , is the creator .
acute exposure guideline levels ( aegl ) values published by the u .
passing the increased value of lands , look at the equally vital question of increased values of crops .
his riches he values only as they can be changed into food .
her last words to me were , ‘ a beautiful ending. ’ ” “ she values the old furniture for sentimental reasons , in fact. ” “ exactly .
greg had spent some time in the united states when he was ten years old and loved to keep up with american sports , but he was very much a creature of australia , with a distinctly aussie flavor in his accent and values .
the conversation takes a turn into politics for a moment , but the focus quickly turns onto don jaime himself , when don jaime reveals his own personal values with an emphasis on honor .
the share for each , therefore , would be a fraction of his exchangeable product , or , in other words , an amount taken from the values delivered by him for purposes of consumption .
the localization of values into such pay areas in an ore-deposit are apparently influenced by : 1 .
a smaller increment will be required for larger values of r .
isbn 0-9767269-0-4 ) is a children 's picture book that depicts caricatures of liberal politicians such as hillary clinton and ted kennedy in order to advocate conservative values .
birch tree specific leaf area values significantly increased after two dry seasons , though the authors did note that , in typical cases , lowered specific leaf area values are seen as an adaptation to drought stress .
any sub-expressions that do not contain unbound variables are evaluated , and function applications whose argument values are known may be reduced .
you can write a program to color in the pixels of an image using those values .
it even prohibits speech that harasses someone based on " clothing , physical appearance , social skills , peer group , intellect , educational program , hobbies , or values .
he valued money , as a man values it who has been poor and feels it essential to his comfort to be fairly beyond the reach of want , and was accordingly pretty sharp at making a bargain with a publisher or in arranging terms with a collaborator .
the church members believe that every child is a priceless blessing and that it emphasizes family values , education , and self-sufficiency .
the dealers however i think , gave fair values , governed for the most part by the prices obtainable by them in the large towns .
instead of being a single value it is equally a broad range of values , and is all of them at the same time .
ka values with judiciously chosen homologous series .
they have not a sense of values , and when they are put in positions of trust , they fail to appreciate how much is entrusted to them . ''
shastri expects his son to follow in his steps and believe in his ideals and values .
early medieval music was often structured in subdivisions of three , while the note values in modern music are unambiguously subdivided into two parts , meaning that only minor prolation has survived in our time signature system .
however they are probably also higher than solar values .
patient drill for weeks , even months , may be necessary before a sense of phonetic values is attained .
coe was concerned to celebrate the values of the western united states in order to meet the threat of communism .
as a church school , the curriculum is based on christian beliefs and values .
the namable essence of things or the standard of values must always be an ideal figment ; existence must always be an empirical fact .
similar cultural tendencies and values have recently been found in south asian american families hailing from the indian subcontinent ( such as indian , bangladeshi and pakistani ) , whose children similarly face extra pressure by parents to succeed in school and to achieve high-ranked jobs .
voici quarante ans que je travaille , quarante ans que je me tiens debout par le mépris des injures que m ' a values chacune de mes œuvres .
the attempt is made to create an interest in food values , in proper cooking , and in wise spending .
according to its mission statement , the boy scouts of america seeks " to prepare young people to make ethical and moral choices over their lifetimes by instilling in them the values of the scout oath and law " .
perhaps it would be most correct to call it the sciences of values , inasmuch as every one of these over-individual decisions constitutes a value in our world which our individual will finds as an absolute datum like the objects of experience .
this has been done , but without sacrificing all graphics , and is known ( for certain values of " known " ) as kudos .
respectively for the three values , unused : now 15s. , 20s. , and 30s .
there are symbols which have four different phonetic values and four different meanings .
these are called the stable homotopy groups of spheres and have been computed for values of k up to 64 .
this reflects the aim of the college to educate the whole person , combining the traditional values of honesty , integrity and citizenship with a determination to meet the individual needs of pupils so they may realise their full potential .
he values them far above gainsboroughs !
we shall , therefore , waste both time and human values if we wait until our knowledge is mathematically exact before we make it useful to ourselves and to others .
f ( q sec i ) } , from which the values of t , x , y , i , and tan i are given by integration with respect to q , when sec i is given as a function of q by means of ( 51 ) .
the party defines itself the party of the " social , national and popular right " and promotes patriotism , catholic values and national cohesion .
much as he values money , i happen to know that he values merit more. ” “ what will the city say ?
hence the first principle of news values is timeliness -- news is news only because it just happened and can be spoken of as one of the events of `` to-day '' or of `` late yesterday . ''
the value of c ( speed of light ) and the resistance of the aether are altered and it is possible to produce large h values with low e values .
brown also values his family 's connection with the franchise ; evident in his choosing to name paul brown stadium after his father rather than to sell corporate naming rights for it .
in alabama there was a sixty-five per cent decrease in property values , in florida forty-five per cent , and in louisiana fifty to seventy-five per cent .
thus , must equal the inverse of on the image of , but may take any values for elements of not in the image .
sixty series were taken , and the values found for the average _et_ were 4.52 secs , for _ffa_ and 6.24 secs , for _faa_ , _st_ being 5.0 secs .
for symbols and values which were discarded by 1932 , see history of the international phonetic alphabet .
wants and values , _bibliography_ , 499-500 .
it hardly need be observed that the rise and prosperity of these institutions must stand or fall by the correctness of the assumption of fixed values and of the monetisation of all products .
`` d'you think the values are all right ? ''
during the great financial depression of 1907 , when security values were slumping in a manner that brought financial ruin to many , mr. o ’ connor ’ s fortune suffered a large shrinkage .
it has incorporate also in its own being the surprise of æsthetic values -- the sudden joy of light , the gracious wonder of tone and form .
this was done at first by setting fixed values on property , such as real estate , buildings , manufacturing plants , etc .
in 1962 , british weather vessels measured sea temperature and salinity values from the surface down to as part of their duties .
both aim at change of habit of thought and action , primarily through removing obsessions from , and establishing actual values in , the mind ; and secondarily , through so reordering the entire environment of the subject as to reinforce the primary process .
i have told them to report to you on the crop values , and harvest plans , and fall seeding later .
nevertheless , the few available long range figures indicate a widespread and considerable increase in american city land values .
according to amjad jaimoukha , chechen values based around democracy , freedom , ideological pluralism and deference to individuality date back to this event .
i 'm excluding particles that move in the opposite direction ie i only consider particles that have positive values of ' x ' velocity .
in keyword view , users can also view properties for items such as checkpoints , output values , and actions , use conditional and loop statements , and insert breakpoints to assist in debugging a test .
he who values the merits of others , and in their pleasure takes joy , even as though it were his own . ''
it is not easy to estimate values correctly .
jankowski suggests that determination of the epistemic values of encyclopedias is more problematic requiring genre analysis .
also use small letters to represent numerical values .
we shall see what other influences may keep the charges below their possible level ; but the natural difference between two local values of goods is the basis of the charge for carrying them from one point to the other .
further , a series of the form just written can be made to represent any arbitrary system of values between the given limits , and so the possibility of the expansion is demonstrated .
even lately the people feared the poets and did them reverence , although the new ignorance ( known humorously as education ) was gradually strangling the life out of wisdom , and was setting up a different and debased standard of mental values .
he was confused by the ease with which the real , the solid , became the nebulous and unreal , as though the only standard of values , of weights and measures , lay absurdly in his own inconsequential attitude .
they were known for their intelligence , commitment to the traditional values and socio-political interests of northern nigeria and their internal camaraderie .
shall we say that values are restored and that the congress will , therefore , repeal the laws under which we have been bringing them back ?
land values , are affected in the same way .
land values have increased and are increasing ; especially in the most fertile regions in the south-eastern parts of the province .
the values of the arguments are added , and the result is returned to the caller , where it is assigned to the variable sumvalue .
a criticism of the highest values that have prevailed hitherto .
i don 't consider " utility " to be one of those values , but some people do .
there are therefore values of color and of chiaroscuro , which may be illustrated in a piece of drapery .
sham lal as a " great editor , a thoughtful writer and a voice of reason , liberal values and patriotism .
in many contexts the choice of sign convention ( which range of values is considered positive and which negative ) is natural , whereas in others the choice is arbitrary subject only to consistency , the latter necessitating an explicit sign convention .
_phil._ and those are no small talents , to a lady that understands , and values the french air , as your ladyship does .
however , generally we also want to know how close those estimates might be to the true values of parameters .
the book merits a separate article as the sentiments are very different to the values of many australians .
because of rising land values , houses formerly located in third ward , neartown , the west end and west university place were relocated from their former land parcels and rehabilitated .
although he had become fully secular , he felt it essential to assure the survival of jewish values , culture and traditions in the new generation of jews growing up in america .
in carrying out their program , they resorted to vilification , ridicule , and disparagement of negroes , accusing them of destroying property values and robbing white people of their homes .
lady hallé , court violinist to queen alexandra , owns the concert strad of ernst ( 1814-1865 ) , composer of the celebrated elegie , and values it at $ 10,000 .
taking a flier in the street was altogether different -- great financiers were behind the fluctuations of values told by the tongue of the ticker , and behind them was the wealth of the republic and still in the far distance the power of the american people .
since this charming local atmosphere is the key component to projects like angkor tourist city , local officials continue to discuss how to successfully incorporate future tourism without sacrificing local values and culture .
it is safe to say that he typifies and values what some have called the yankee spirit of innovation .
but subtlety , except in manipulating stock values , is not a wall street characteristic .
it must be the reverse ; for the workers create values together with the surplus products which are appropriated by capital .
it is largely during times of reflection that students achieve greater personal development by coming to a better understanding of their own values , opinions , and assumptions .
shinui also frequently praised the supreme court of israel as a guardian of the law and moral values .
commercial newspaper jobs made him one of china 's first photojournalists , but his work in other areas put artistic values first .
for example , the statement read ( x , y , a [ 1 ] , b [ 1 ] ) will input values into the four variables listed .
he values her most highly , but he thought of others than himself .
acoustical engineers fit these values to the appropriate tl curve ( or transmission loss ) to determine an stc rating .
it is dangerous to snatch from any man , even the lowest of the species , that which he values above every other thing .
she posits core religious values of community and self-sacrifice as important to eco-pagan movements , as well as the broader environmental justice movement .
i guess the simple answer would be it has real values , but it does not have real values for all real numbers .
related to the first summit , a global essay contest was also held , in which 265 students from 61 countries shared their ideas about olympic values and how to realize them through sport , culture , education , and other public initiatives .
their land is not for sale , in spite of the rising values .
`` regardless of the moral values of our mutual behavior , '' odal said dryly , `` it is evident that there is no longer any use in calling on telepathically-guided assistants , i shall face the watchman alone during the second half of the duel . ''
if stereotypes are defined by social values , then stereotypes will only change as per changes in social values .
vi a pair of boots there seems to be very little in a pair of boots -- except , perhaps , a pair of feet -- until a great crisis arises ; and in a great crisis all things assume new values .
as a jewish youth movement , young judea stresses jewish values , jewish education , and the preservation of the identity of the jewish people .
land companies in the transvaal alone possess some 12 million acres , the bulk of which has been bought for supposed mineral values .
then v_o² = cz ; where c is a constant which for the solani aqueduct had the values 1.9 to 2 , the depths being 6 to 10 ft. , and the velocities 3½ to 4½ ft .
to put it in technical language , in the world of industry we are concerned with exchange values , but in the home with use values alone .
the final _e_ , followed by a consonant , is usually sounded , and has its usual grammatical values .
because of this wonderful variety in combinations , leading to entirely different playing values , the author has found it impossible to agree with some other students of games , that it is practicable to select a few games that contain all of the typical elements of interest .
gallery 6 nonya , features the arts and crafts of nonyas like beadwork , along with a display on the nonya kebaya , and the womenfolks ' role of transmitting cultural values to peranakan children .
for if the ordinary wage earner , by his work , makes possible a considerable addition to the market values produced , competition among employers for men will lead to the payment of high wages , and vice versa .
we get the following values for ne × 10^-10 : -- + -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -+ -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -+ -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -+ | | moist gas .
“ a new handbook is about to appear , with the title , ‘ _the standard guide to postage-stamp collecting , with their values and degrees of rarity_ , ’ a work upon which the authors , messrs. bellars and davie , have been engaged for three years .
so tonight i want to focus less on a checklist of proposals and focus more on the values at stake in the choices before us .
there is nothing to go by in such cases better than market values ; but in the plainer staples knowledge of construction , finish , etc. , means ability to classify fabrics and estimate their approximate relative values .
these values are not only concordant , but are evidently of the same order of magnitude as the temperature-coefficient in ordinary chemical reactions .
these values have no objective standing ground in current psychology .
going to the stable to look after sir wycherly 's hunter , for i knew how much he values the animal , i found one of the stranger 's servants in discourse with the ostler .
there is no fixed par of exchange between gold-using and silver-using countries : par of exchange between them fluctuates with changes in the comparative values of the two metals .
allmessages ] ] for some reason ( probably because they don 't have default values ) .
the second link was jerry 's sense of dramatic values , which made him play up to this somewhat elderly siren .
strictly speaking , the term `` shading '' is used to indicate the value of individual phrases or clauses ; `` perspective , '' to indicate the values of several phrases or clauses viewed relatively .
in 1896 the value had dimished to $ 1,727,926,084 -- a decrease of 28.6 % from the 1890 values , and an increase of 9.6 % over those of 1880 .
the harry potter books have updated the boarding school to modern values , for example by depicting mixed-sex education houses .
the church standards are affected in four ways : ( a ) the goods of the secular life , art , family , power , wealth , claim a place in the system of values .
and so -- you're intelligent , lazy , dreamy , and with a fine perception of artistic values .
a serious fact is that , if we include the entire world , we can not establish , in the way we have proposed , the natural standards toward which values , wages , and interest are tending .
schneider theorems , and implies the transcendence of some values of elliptic functions and elliptic modular functions .
combining this trial data with a dirichlet prior requires only adding the outcome frequencies to the dirichlet prior alpha values , resulting in a diriclet posterior distribution for each simulated trial .
this monarch is also a very excellent shot ; his uncommon success at this diversion is thought to have roused the jealousy of his most catholic majesty , who also values himself on his skill as a marksman .
it depends on their values and what they deem as a proper course of life .
the x and y values used to create the chromaticity diagram are created from the xyz values by dividing x and y by the sum of x , y,z .
finding it unlikely that billions of grains can be recalled nearly 3 years after they were eaten , i calculate the values here from previous records instead .
the conductor , not knowing the dynamic values of the various stop combinations as well as the organist , must not presume to criticize the latter for playing too loudly or too softly unless he has gone down into the auditorium to judge the effect there .
in that case , there might be a conveniency in striking the gold coins of the same weight with the silver ; because the proportion of their values would then constantly be the same with the proportion of the metals .
this is necessary ; for players are so made among us that , unless they catch the spirit of their parts from the author , they are sure to spoil them by some misconception of their values .
he supports an international framework of dispute settlement because he has no armed choice , not because it tallies with his deeply held convictions and values .
at the same time instructions were issued to postmasters that they were not to sell the 1/2c , 6c , 8c and dollar denominations except in the complete sets of sixteen values .
“ there 's but the one thing i would like to say to my friend , and that 's that i should like him not to think unkindly of one that values his good opinion -- if she were worthy to have it .
now choose theta values evenly spaced between 0 and 2pi .
he likes structure and perfection , and values his work .
the dollar and cent are the money values in china , -- copper _cash_ and paper notes .
human values can not be raised or lowered at will .
there was evidently some more definite and corporate form of ownership in the properties and values of the adventurers , arrived at later .
experiment with different number values to get your desired results .
by appreciating and understanding different beliefs , values , behaviors and business strategies of a variety of companies within other countries , entrepreneurs will be able to internationalize successfully .
it was just the kind of story that he could handle in a way to bring out all its values .
they showed conclusively that the victim had been of importance , a citizen of rare values in any community that he might choose to favor with his presence .
while these dcf models are commonly used , the uncertainty in these values is hardly ever discussed .
a causal system is a system with output and internal states that depends only on the current and previous input values .
certainly , the basic values communicated in the concepts of discipline and profession are resonate with fundamental nursing values and contribute to a fuller understanding of nursing as caring .
secretary fish was almost kind ; he kept the tradition of new york social values ; he was human and took no pleasure in giving pain .
the homosexual family and its occasional focus on adopting children reflects the fact that we live in a world of many options , and consequently of very relative values .
in an artistical composition , the character of any one part in its relation to other parts and to the whole ; — often used in the plural ; as , the values are well given , or well maintained .
he is thoroughly conversant with realty values and has negotiated many important property transfers .
the centre of gravity of all values for each soul lay in that soul itself : salvation or damnation !
we have been restating moral values within the last half-century ; it is the same with artistic ones .
in christian values , nietzsche read nihilism , decadence , degeneration , and death .
plastikspork will post a log of the changes , someone can easily review those and go back and fix them properly , looking for a pattern like repeated numeric values or the score keyword ( for example ) .
php uses argc as a count of arguments and argv as an array containing the values of the arguments .
drake wrote the resolution at the southern baptist convention in 1996 calling for a boycott of the walt disney corporation over its decision to " promote homosexuality over family values , " by granting health benefits to gay and lesbian partners of employees .
a belching factory in the wrong place can perform such multiple functions as blighting a countryside , polluting a stream , lowering subdivision property values , and increasing the local rate of emphysema .
thus my reading of the epics leads me to the conviction that they were composed in an age which knew nothing of coined money ; an age when cattle were the standard of values : -- this or that object was worth so many cows .
the following table shows the principal products exported from the agricultural zone of venezuela from 1917-1918 , -- weight in kilograms and values in bolivares .
if the most significant digit cannot take all values from 0 to 9 is often termed a fractional digit .
the later forms may possibly have been alphabetical expressions of certain syllables called _ak [ s. ] aras_ , which possessed in sanskrit fixed numerical values , [ 114 ] but this is equally uncertain with the rest .
thus increased specialization gives very real advertising values to a community which builds up a reputation for its products .
this means any client-side data values can be changed and edited .
these values included honesty , friendliness , dignity , diligence , modesty , thrift , personal neatness , and obedience .
if the room is small certain values and hues will make it appear much smaller .
this time comes after the first heedless flights of youth have passed , when the initiative and more powerful efforts have been made , and he begins to feel the uncertainty of results and final values which attaches itself to everything .
look , none of my principles or values have changed .
it did not handle numeric variables , multiclass classification tasks , or missing values .
traditional indian family values are highly respected , although urban families now prefer a nuclear family system due to the socio-economic constraints imposed by the traditional joint family system .
non-physical values .
she swiftly computed the relative splashing values of the ink-well and the pot of paste .
these associated elements- values , expectations , rules-are rarely perceived as constituting an extension of the practical experience through which humanity distinguishes itself from sheer naturalness .
another study has shown that american culture values high arousal positive states such as excitement , over low arousal positive states such as calmness .
for there was madness after all in what she had done -- crazy moonstruck madness , in which all sense of values had been lost , and her life and his life ruined !
the results stated that although all the itv channels had a good combining brand , with the itv logo , they all looked the same , couldn 't be told apart , that their programming values were blurred and that the itv logo itself was getting boring .
undoubtedly some of the masochistic values of chiliasm were taken over by the various , previously mentioned concepts that combined to make up the idea of the catholic church .
from the quantitative values obtained the preparation may be taken to represent : sp .
add unsigned integer values with overflow check .
this is a conservative estimate , in view of recent values placed on deaths from tuberculosis .
* * * * * intellectualism , in fact , the view that life can be determined by ideas ( and of this socialism is the essence ) if it can be justified at all has to be justified in the face of all current human values .
they were all , so far as we could judge , of unequal values .
homocysteine exists at neutral ph values as a zwitterion .
see law , legal values .
the term , as we use it , answers to no real thing , but merely serves as an algebraical symbol for comparing the values of products with one another .
★ ★ from maine to florida [ illustration : amoco american gas ] the sign of greater values ★ transcriber ’ s notes ★ -- retained publication information from the printed edition : this ebook is public-domain in the country of publication .
[ 467 ] the same quantity of gold and silver may have widely varying values , depending on the distribution of wealth and power .
the road toward peace charles w. eliot `` few writers have discussed the way and means of establishing peace and friendly relations among nations with more sanity and far-reaching estimate of values . ''
the least and the greatest of the principal indices of refraction may have any values between 1·742 and 1·749 , and 1·750 and 1·757 , respectively , the maximum amount of double refraction remaining always the same , namely , 0·009 .
and the upright man values his soul because of its mighty and almost infinite capabilities and powers .
if the constructors have no parameters then the set of constructors acts like an enum ; a type with a fixed number of values .
that is quite as practical as dividing the surplus among the workmen , and we thereby create values for the enterprise .
correctly computing force ( or moment ) values from inverse dynamics can be challenging because external forces ( e .
the entrance of alfonso into spain began a long period of political stability founded on conservative values , property , monarchy , and a liberal state .
these effects become much larger for higher values of the top mass and therefore could indirectly see the top quark even if it could not be directly produced in any experiment at the time .
patch-type fss below resonance will produce a capacitive shunt admittance equivalent circuit , with closer packing of elements in the fss sheet yielding higher shunt capacitance values in the equivalent circuit .
dairy products , table of food values of , 181 .
in a real database we do not need values for all of those attributes to identify a tuple .
duke university where he studied literary markets in chile , the role subaltern readers play in influencing these markets , and the influence of cultural values on curricular choices in schools .
the original data values which fall in a given small interval , a bin , are replaced by a value representative of that interval , often the central value .
he caught himself wishing he was back in peru arguing with hesitant south americans over the relative values of american and soviet complex commodities -- and then he laughed at himself .
as exchange values , all commodities are but definite measures of _congealed labor-time_ .
we know that the relative values of light and shade in various colours contiguous to each other , is not actually the same as the impression conveyed to our eyes .
in the bermuda rise seismic velocities in the oceanic crust differ somewhat from the typical abyssal-floor values .
iahv also recognizes that to nurture and ensure future conservation of nature , it is necessary that these values be inculcated in young minds at home and at school .
_this_ home seemed to stand for something so far removed from new munich values !
did i have a new sense of values , born of suffering ?
the values of colour appear bleached and vary incessantly .
so p eq q is true if p and q have the same truth value ( both true or both false ) , and false if they have different truth values .
joseph 's college ( new york ) works to uphold positive values and reach out to their community .
this typically means that the parameter is swept logarithmically , in order to cover a wide range of values .
it is only his table of values with which i quarrel , and the destructive use he makes of it .
even though it takes place in egypt , the characters of the film are battling for distinctly american values .
b ratios are commonly used to compare banks , because most assets and liabilities of banks are constantly valued at market values .
the balance is no longer evenly maintained between the relative values of the miniature and the border as factors in the general scheme of decoration .
the center organizes socratic dialogue sessions with high school students and young entrepreneurs to study philosophical values as guides to excellence in thinking and action .
since she has relatively high attribute values on everything except strength and stamina , which are above-average among the female characters , she is an extremely capable player on the baseball field , whether infield or outfield , and she almost always succeeds in stealing bases .
there is an exact parallel to this method of recording assessed values in the case of fractions of knights ' fees where portions of land are entered as paying so much 'when the scutage is forty shillings ' , instead of being assessed in terms of the knight's fee .
conservatives have always critiqued the showing of violence on television as detrimental to the children 's values .
we do not wish to be russian , in spite of certain values inherent in the slavic character , nor do we desire to be french .
he now values fingal and temora only as showing with how little evidence a story may be believed , and with how little merit a book may be popular .
what men make by juggling with values and putting taxes on other men adds nothing to the aggregate wealth ; but what they make by improved methods of production causes a net addition to it .
in this work it is grouped with other values as having been issued in “ 1885-86. ” this is a little vague , but we do not suppose that mr. lockyer had any more precise information about the date of issue than we ourselves have now .
you know dear aunt mary gave them to her , and as they are her work , mamma values them so much !
apart from the fp vote - which was pretty evenly split - general consensus seems to indicate that all point values should stay as they are .
* * * * * from the time of berzelius , each successive generation of chemists has striven to better the example of that master of determinative chemistry in the effort to obtain accurate values for the atomic weights of the elements .
if readonly is set then it is not possible to write any values to the args table at all .
however , the values that were hard-coded in these nascar articles ( for example , representing 211 .
he takes , moreover , a world-wide view , declaring that it is the relation between the volume of gold money throughout the world and the demand for standard money throughout the world which determines the relative values of money and commodities .
in works such as " little fables for big children " , he continues to advocate for the adoption of enlightenment values , as he does in his memoirs , published in the last year of his life .
in the prussian states , values are reckoned in _thalers_ and _silver groschen_ .
of these two operations , the latter , the creation of place values , is by far the more elastic and adaptable process .
the sum of subjective values may increase or decrease , -- indeed it is one of the great objects of human endeavour to increase the sum of want-satisfying power , -- but the sum of the ratios between these subjective values is constant .
that 's a safer proposition than ysleta lots with hot-air values , but it 's the same kind of a wheel after all .
ravitch believed that the free schools ' values would conflict with predominant student testing trends .
although goshen maintains that people of different faiths are welcome to the college , the school emphasizes judeo-christian values in regard to operation , justice , and teaching .
variations in shape and size of individual dunes are determined by the mathematical values applied to each of the traits mentioned in the discussion of ripple formation .
in many measurements what is sought is not the value of a single quantity , but the relation between the values of two variable quantities .
the amount of food depends on the number of players ; it starts out low and steadily increases to high values towards the end of the game .
fortunately , we and our allies have rediscovered the strength of our common democratic values , and we 're applying them as a cornerstone of a comprehensive strategy for peace with freedom .
this drives the examples with every and to ; every causes to to continue to return values until it fails .
mr. foaden states that , speaking in round numbers , we may say that nile deposit in flood contains nitrogen ·1 per cent phosphoric acid ·2 „ potash ·6 „ he values the manure deposited by the nile annually in a well irrigated basin at £·75 .
szczebrzeszyn landscape park ( ) is a protected area ( landscape park ) in lublin voivodeship in eastern poland , created to protect the natural , cultural and historic values of the roztocze region .
and lois , with her nice sense of values , her feeling for a situation , knew that the interview was at an end .
ignatius made his initial commitment to a new way of life by leaving his soldier 's weapons ( and symbolically , his old values ) on an altar before an image of the christ child seated on the lap of our lady of montserrat .
literacy appropriates the rules and expectations that acknowledge and support ideals and values .
lord howe island is regarded as having high geological , geomorphological and geodiversity values , many of which extend to the habitats of the marine park .
in 1940 , all political parties were ordered to dissolve into the imperial rule assistance association , forming a single party state based on totalitarian values .
his concern was for the higher elements of life ; his appeal was to the worthier values in men .
vatican secretary of state cardinal tarcisio bertone praised the project in a statement read at its presentation , saying it was designed to ' bring out the human and spiritual values in sport ' .
it 's clear that the community values the signpost , and that the english wikipedia has grown so large that some kind of digest of all the latest happenings is now fairly essential .
pearl supports both fixed-point and floating-point numeric values , character and character string data as well as bit values .
the hatred and violence visited upon them today offends the values that drove their work and passion for improving their neighbors ' lives .
multiple values for ( maximal ) decay energy are mapped to decay modes in their order .
some remind him of the struggles he and his brother went through , while some remind him of what he values most .
a slightly longer study evaluating the effect of a yogurt with probiotic strains on twenty-nine subjects over six months found no statistically significant differences in total serum cholesterol or ldl values .
the reported values are , land , $ 114,600 ; buildings , $ 9,200 ; implements and machinery , $ 1,200 ; and live stock , $ 1,383 .
with this terrific war raging new standards of values in religion , as in politics , have come into operation , shattering old ideals evermore .
kalakshetra is a cultural academy dedicated to the preservation of traditional values in indian art , especially in the field of bharatanatyam dance and gandharvaveda music .
these values were not server-sided , and one person editing their own values in their own file would affect that map for everyone on the channel .
chastity , as a transmuter , may change unused sexual energy into intellectual or social energy ; in animals this transmutation of physical values is impossible .
after a brief recapitulation of christian beliefs and values , and their relevance to british politics , the mayflower declaration describes " six guiding principles which highlight some basic themes of christian democracy " .
we do not study this interior to discover special art values or to distinguish in what manner it differs from others we have seen .
decreased values of nerve conduction studies are used as indicators of nerve compression and may aid in determining the localization of compression .
under no circumstances does this prevent a real appreciation of such legends , and of the spiritual and cultural values enshrined in them .
another format which gives the current positions of a board , with an extended set of structured attribute values using the ascii character set .
similarly , null values are often confused with empty strings .
partnership between businesses and ngos active in the district comprise hundreds of children and adolescents around socioesportivos programs emphasizing the importance of values like self-esteem , teamwork , quality of life and citizenship .
also , when looking at individuals in areas potentially influenced by western culture , few studies have attempted to measure how much an individual has adopted the mainstream culture or retained the traditional cultural values of the area .
we believe in the values of equity , fairness , tolerance , understanding social awareness and responsibility for others , with respect to race , ethnicity , religion , socioeconomic status , physical and mental abilities , gender and sexual orientation .
we render and receive services ; we supply and demand values ; we make purchases and sales ; we work for others , and others work for us ; in short , we are ‹producers and consumers› .
the false-consensus effect is not necessarily restricted to cases where people believe that their values are shared by the majority .
this is not affected by whether the values are rational or irrational .
counting the permutations for b2 is more complicated , because the choices for b2 depend on the values in b1 .
compare three chromas with three values of red .
the exact position of the tool and the measuring method can be specified , in addition to the nominal values of the geometry , so that , for example , the left or right corner has to be measured for a grooving tool .
this opposer of current political and moral values declares that reality is itself a creation of art -- each individual creates his picture of the world .
some say victoria 's choice of a white gown may have simply been a sign of extravagance , but may have also been influenced by the values she held which emphasized sexual purity .
this would fit in also with the general objective of the sunday school , and is not the mere impartation of information , but the letting loose of moral and religious values in life .
the locomotive dashes through little drifts , and drowns sound , but he knows that in a very few moments lot kruger will have discovered that what he values more than the stock of the utah central railway is passing away from him .
hansberry 's personal past , values , and involvement with ideological movements heavily influenced thematic elements in her plays .
shorter note values attach a stem to the note head , and possibly beams or flags .
the friction that ensues constitutes an experience of human values that the hermit in his cell can never know .
) , which , in cases where the transport number remains constant , agree with the values calculated from those numbers .
whatever the ratio m/m , the two values of [ sigma ] ² can never be exactly equal , but they are approximately equal if a , b are nearly equal and [ mu ] is very small .
there are several different ways to get the unique solution , the simplest of which is taking the singular value decomposition of m and replacing the singular values with ones .
the sentence could just read " gmc declined offers by several animal sanctuaries to allow the oxen to retire at no cost to the school , saying that the offers did not align with the values of a sustainable , production-based farm .
in spite , also , of the need for many delicately graded values to render the stuffs and the modeling , the weavers have kept the color in large enough masses to be broadly decorative .
this sorority was formed to give women an opportunity to become a part of a greek-lettered organization , but at the same time hold fast to their christian values .
rush arts embraces a set of core values , abbreviated as " icepac .
wherever the markings indicating relative values happen to be placed , they can well be compared in class and the disagreements discussed .
nishimura established his own intellectual society in 1876 to stress moral values .
for currency values in articles on canadian topics , the canadian dollar is considered the default currency where an unprefixed dollar sign is used e .
it included four panels that discussed how asia has influenced the way the west does business and vice versa , and included such topics as asian investment and international issues , leadership in a global perspective , and asian cultural values and entrepreneurship .
observations on reversionary payments ; on schemes for providing annuities for widows , and persons in old age ; on the method of calculating the values of assurances on lives ; and on the national debt .
culturally , the victorian era was a bold transition from the preceding georgian era , a period largely defined by logic and rationalism , and a progression towards romanticism and mysticism in terms of religion , societal values , and the arts .
; and this disparity is an essential condition of the difference of values of these fibres .
the report presents human development index values for the five largest metro areas in the state as well as for eight economic regions and 233 neighborhood and county groups covering the entire state .
but from the day it was completed its securities have figured in the market only for their speculative values .
a well-designed and substantial cricket grandstand enhances the aesthetic values of the park and is a fine example of the work of the brisbane city architect 's office in the 1930s .
that there are contradictions in its statements and different values in its parts can not be denied , but they are not explained on the grounds here set forth .
the theory of international values which i afterwards published , emanated from these conversations , as did also the modified form of ricardo 's _theory of profits_ , laid down in my _essay on profits and interest_ .
at the turn of the 20th century , the first wave of german sociologists formally introduced verstehende ( interpretive ) sociological antipositivism , proposing research should concentrate on human cultural norms , values , symbols , and social processes viewed from a resolutely subjective perspective .
for him alone i should regard the book as one not to be missed by anyone who values a handling of character at once delicate and masterful .
this showed that the ordnance values were not quite accurate , which was not to be wondered at as no direct observation had been possible .
lays down a rule as to contributory values in place of the widely varying rules of different countries as to the amounts upon which ship and freight shall contribute ( cf .
several , which offer marked or typical differences , each possessing distinct playing values , are given here .
apprehension , which makes man so like a god , makes him in one respect immortal ; it quickens his numbered moments with a vision of what never dies , the truth of those moments and their inalienable values .
maximal values in all meteorological stations are higher than , while the absolute lowest value was registered on june 6 , 1963 in gnjilane with a value of .
phase ii environmental site assessment is an " intrusive " investigation which collects original samples of soil , groundwater or building materials to analyze for quantitative values of various contaminants .
by evaluating a nurbs at various values of the parameter , the curve can be traced through space ; likewise , by evaluating a nurbs surface at various values of the two parameters , the surface can be represented in cartesian space .
it is to my mind most important that the transition to new methods of industry and labour should not be sudden but that the old values should be gradually transmuted .
if a set of data is actually a sample of a normal distribution , a plot of the values against their probit scores will be approximately linear .
as there are a great number of plates used for printing the two-cent values , the new variety will probably be found in profusion , and it is interesting to hunt for them .
he responded that celestiial " is romanticized paganism with very real pagan values behind it " .
according to the program , decided at the second congress of 2014 the movement traditional ally of the catholic church and will strive to uphold traditional christian values .
it is enough that the pupils know that the different powers of √-1 continually reproduce in turn one of these four values , ±1 , ±√-1 .
the values of the levi-civita symbol are independent of any metric tensor and coordinate system .
exaggerated values placed on american-owned goods held up for months at rotterdam and other neutral ports by british became largely discounted on october 1 , 1915 , under the scrutiny of the foreign trade advisers of the state department .
in round two , these values escalated to 20 points each and 40 points for the final word .
the patriarchal values that accompany this life-style affected such issues as contraception , the distribution of family power , and the roles of individuals in marriage and the family .
this way , even as property values rise ( whether due to increased demand , increased government spending , or inflation ) , residents and businesses still pay the same amount of money .
macaulay 's report on the subjects for examination and their values .
for transparent materials , these values can also be increased due to multiple reflections within the material .
he values it among his most cherished possessions .
bainbridge ( 1978 ) and wuthnow ( 1976 ) found that the most susceptible people to paranormal belief are those who are poorly educated , unemployed or have roles that rank low among social values .
living on toronto island around boats and sailing paul learned the basics of the sport , as well as the values and importance of sport early in life .
4 now , after many years the king said to his people , take these lands and all i have ; enhance their values ; rule yourselves , and live in peace .
whoever , therefore , values a whole skin will do well not to trust himself in this mountainous region to any vehicle without the greatest precaution .
he represents the nature-philosophy of romanticism and especially of schelling , a philosophy so vast and unsubstantial that all values of conduct and all incentives to action disappeared in its featureless abyss .
the process being repeated for different values of the angle [ theta ] the curve through the several points oac is the centroid which may be imagined as formed by an extension of the material of the link a .
the instinct for values , the habit of economy , the technique of business , are only three forms of the supreme quality of that judgment which is success .
people and programs make different choices for such b1 values and curve counts .
add default params with blank values .
one must be part of a community that is pursuing the values set out by the sikh gurus and every sikh has to give in whatever way possible to the community .
during this time he consumes a sum of values which may be expressed by fifteen hectolitres .
this medicalization of some element of human condition has significance , in principle , as a matter for political discourse or dialogue in civil society concerning values or morals .
the switch from annual community elections to biannual elections limits the regular refreshing of community values on the board , and is emblematic of the hasty way in which the latest bylaws change was effected .
with respect to relative magnitudes , prices do not depend on values , and values do not depend on prices .
often the values may come from a specific thesaurus ( e .
every rug has three values , first the art value depending upon its colors and designs , second the collector 's value depending upon its rarity , and third the utility value depending upon its durability .
the union of the two , hitherto separate , regions was controversial among many zanzibaris ( even those sympathetic to the revolution ) but was accepted by both the nyerere government and the revolutionary government of zanzibar owing to shared political values and goals .
during the recent rapid appreciation of home values in south florida , many homes the cresthaven neighborhood have come to be better maintained than they once were .
in each period of industrial activity land values have steadily risen , culminating in speculation which carried them up in great jumps .
in software , describes values of a function which are not in its ` natural' range of return values , but are rather signals that some kind of exception has occurred .
his plan should be extended so as to cover subtractive values or the case of properties showing a deficit .
the printing press is a machine that art values because it obeys her .
containing tables of values , wages , interest , scantling , board , plank and log measurements , business forms , etc .
the values in various pages found by google are often from wikipedia .
he is not wholly impotent to change this world of economic values , nor is he wholly without influence on the balance of cosmic forces .
there is one consideration which often adds much to the interest with which we view an object , but which we might be virtuously inclined not to admit among aesthetic values .
see values .
mr. howes states that these two values were issued on june 21st , 1898 , and , following its usual custom , the canadian post-office did not place the other denominations on sale until the corresponding values of the old series were all used up .
koonz has claimed that women involved in resistance activities were more likely to escape notice owing to the " masculine " values of the third reich .
the pity of it is that thousands of these victims of either satiety or tantalus seem never to dream that there are other values , or anything else , or better , in life .
it ’ s connecting lovers with uncannily matched interests and values .
the measure of values 29 v. summary and conclusions 50 vi .
why , the leal fellow values the world and the world 's gear not a flea . ''
the concepts of tradition and traditional values are frequently used in political and religious discourse to establish the legitimacy of a particular set of values .
the differences in values and intentions are directly linked to the pluralism in design outcomes that exist within architecture and design .
* * * * * to face page 98 as to educational values there is a widespread misunderstanding .
anthony 's sangeet mandal and taught music and the values governing life to the children of manickpur .
our support of reform must combine patience for the enormity of the task and vigilance for our fundamental interest and values .
my or is that we base our values on other values .
shannon sampling theorem , or such as the first-order hold or linear interpolation between sample values .
scientifically speaking , this perhaps involves a contradiction since , speaking thus , `` tactile values '' depend upon the light and dark relations of color , and not upon its kind or quality .
they are the smallest difference between sorted rf values , or product of such differences .
unfortunately , he found no way as agreeable as that practised at home ; and his views of womankind in especial were tinged by the remembrance of the one woman who had given him his sense of `` values . ''
these values are not for the simplest combinations , but for the highest synthetical unit which was immediately apprehended in the series of stimulations .
and certainly the young , who are little trained in estimating values , when brought into close association with their elders are apt to fix their attention on petty points and so to miss the larger lines of character .
in short , the value of land depending wholly upon the power which its ownership gives of appropriating wealth created by labor , the increase of land values is always at the expense of the value of labor .
his sojourn among better-educated men may have roused his ideas to an appreciation of values that deep-sea life had obscured .
these stories are sadly spoiled by a crude philosophy and by '' anarchistic '' protestations against present values .
none of her old values held here ; things she had always thought quite permissible were unforgivable sins ; things at which auntie would turn pale with horror were a quietly accepted part of every-day life .
but the values of rt60 in ic are much smaller than in ak .
convenient pre-setters assume the nominal values , tolerances and designation from tool management and pass the measured values directly to the cnc machine .
there is no explanation for the particular values that physical constants appear to have throughout our universe , such as planck 's constant h or the gravitational constant g .
thus a normal perspective of values is fostered ; we come to learn what is base and what is excellent , and have our eyes opened to the inferior nature of that with which we had before been content .
the contrasting values of other local colors are opposed to that of the dominant mass , and higher and lower values of all these colors repeated throughout the scheme .
he must necessarily bring to this work a special acquaintance with maritime law and the current decisions of the courts on the subject as well as a practical acquaintance with the values involved and the methods of business which they represent .
in the early 1990s , property values plummeted , and the fhrg had to bail out and merge the two largest faroese banks .
and talking about syndicates : the disagreement of members themselves as to values frequently prevented the consummation of important sales and resulted in the loss of large profits to the objectors as well as to their associates .
gradually , however , dramatists have come to get their comic values from people essential to the serious story , or from a comic emphasis they place on certain aspects of the serious figures of the play .
thus , bing wang and shaosheng fan from changsha university of science and technology develop an adaptive filter , where the filter will evaluate discontinuity between gray values of each pixel .
he goes , indeed , so far as to say that this is the sole goal of philosophy ; its message is to create new spiritual values in the life of the individual and of the race .
point values are assigned to all factors in a systematic way , eliminating bias at every stage .
legal values , 23-29 , 40 , 138-39 , 413 , 414 , 435 , n. , 562 , n. , 586-89 .
what we let fall together , we must together remove. ” then , with an abruptness that pertained sometimes to these curious irruptions from the past , the values shifted .
one got into a new world with new values , which after all is i suppose what poetry is all about .
pov to ignore common linguistic usage because of personal or political values .
each man represented on an average six votes , but in estimating their values they said ten , for men always begin by exaggerating their own influence .
it therefore appears that the difference between the heats of combustion of two adjacent members of a series of homologous compounds is practically a constant , and that this constant has two average values , viz .
the average values of vitamin c in 100 ml of the juices of cashew apple , orange , grape , lemon , mango and pineapple are 203 .
they brought back those dear old spoiled-girl days to her ; precious days which no woman values till she has lost them , and the prize of which no man understands .
the values of art and industry.= -- are all these wider interests and fuller powers good ?
the curve is therefore formed by the variety of directions reduced to infinitesimal values .
due to the estimate nature of these values , no single recommendations are given .
henri lefebvre says that ( social ) space is a ( social ) product , or a complex social construction ( based on values , and the social production of meanings ) which affects spatial practices and perceptions .
let denote a measure space and suppose that and are -measurable functions on , taking values in the -dimensional real- or complex euclidean space .
the actual and perceived effects of floodplain land use regulations on property values in london , ontario .
because an agent values e , it follows that they must value the conditions necessary to achieve e .
but all the stories are brief and vivid vignettes of the countryside which mr. fox knows so well , told with the utmost economy of speech and with a fine sense of atmospheric values .
the values not given .
even , however , if there were no other reasons against telling children fairy-tales of sex instead of the real facts , there is one reason which ought to be decisive with every mother who values her influence over her child .
cisco routers running eigrp will not form an eigrp adjacency and will complain about k-values mismatch until these values are identical on these routers .
however , the parse tree explosion problem that ambiguities in natural language tend to produce in this type of approach is worsened for eags because each choice of affix value may produce a separate parse , even when several different values are equivalent .
ensuring access to quality medicines is the powerful aspiration that motivates more than 2,700 employees of the organization , and each of them is guided by the same moral and social responsibilities the company values most .
this states that in the absence of sources the internal nodal values of the property ф should be bounded by its boundary values .
properly speaking , the image is of the distribution of the values of the divisor summatory function , with each vertical slice being a histogram .
this total uncertainty includes all forms of uncertainty related to the computational model as well as the uncertainty in the threshold and margin values .
the things i like constitute my set of values .
it was official theory that arithmetic values , repeated in proper order , would be the way to open conversation .
however , this quantity may always be made arbitrarily small by increasing the absolute values of and ; thus the accuracy of the approximation is usually estimated by comparing this quantity to some function of the denominator , typically a negative power of it .
the religious man values what he sees chiefly as an 'imperfect shadowing forth ' of what he is incapable of seeing .
normal values for thrombin time are 12 to 14 seconds .
coerced values cannot be virtuous .
the team belonged to the " histadrut " , israel 's organization of workers unions , and represented socialist values .
this must be taken into account when describing the strength of the material , so strength is best represented as a distribution of values rather than as one specific value .
these additional phases can be of assistance if a certain part of the work becomes a bottleneck and the limiting values of the unfinished work cannot be raised .
the fact that nobre , considered a leftist and a soarist socialist and who had supported the left bloc in 2009 ( saying he " shared the values of the party " ) , was heading the electoral lists of a rightwing party .
on the opening night , hayim greenberg pointed to the loss of moral values and principles , the loss of the sense that " values are valuable , " as perhaps the basic cause of the deep crisis of our civilization .
i am myself an ardent supporter of the policy which i think has been rather unfortunately named the taxation of land values .
however , like the negative and positive poles of electricity , which are both essential in order that a circuit of effective force be generated , capital and labor likewise had their dual relative values of importance , without which there could be no constancy of harmonious production .
sally had no sense of social values ; she loved to be here , admired , loved , busy .
and it also should be said that in the woodlawn district the proportion of negroes is so small that there has been no occasion for much controversy over an alleged depreciation of property values on account of negro occupancy .
psychometric testing covers a wide range of skills , interests and values of people and can be of use in career counseling in different ways .
in bible belt communities , strong religious tone in public life is accompanied by conservative outlook , preference for large families ( the region has relatively high fertility rates ) , and an emphasis on traditional values .
an increase of values follows , which is due to the growth of the community .
in the matter of private sales , it is difficult to keep track of rising values on account of the number of sales which take place every day .
journey into greece , p. 8 -- 14 ; ) the last of whom , by mistaking _sestertia_ for _sestertii_ , values an arch with statues and columns at twelve pounds .
the 20 richest people of all time with increasing knowledge of ancient roman monetary values , most modern experts believe his wealth to be far less than contemporary historians claimed .
because early iterations use small values for d , they execute extremely quickly .
second , y [ n ] is represented as a single bit , meaning it can take on only two values .
if it is clear , then , that the study of history can not be justified upon a purely utilitarian basis , we may pass to the consideration of other values that have been proposed .
laib says , " the stylistic values implicit in our theories , pedagogy , and culture , so overwhelmingly favor consciousness , that elaboration gets lost in the learning process " .
this , and other early cryptographic voting systems , assumed that voters could reliably compute values with their personal computers .
suit values are as follows : clubs lead and mostly portend happiness and good business arrangements , and no matter how numerous or how accompanied by cards of other suits are seldom considered as bearers of other than the very best augury .
we are also reminded that attacks on our security personnel and on our institutions of governance are by their very nature , attacks on our country , on our values .
both instruments give the percentage of the hæmoglobin of normal blood which the blood examined contains , and are sufficiently exact in their results for practical purposes and for relative values ; although errors up to 10 % and over occur with unpractised observers .
thanks to erdoğan 's economic policies , turkey has a thriving television industry , capable of staging elaborate period dramas , and a prosperous family-oriented middle class of observant muslims eager to watch their own values reflected in a historical imperial setting .
is it a true symptom of national vitality , or must we see in these data the warnings of a period of commercial crisis , characterised , according to the learned economist juglar , by the rise of all values and by frantic speculation ?
the solution is to use a brownian bridge that is required to go through the values w ( 0 ) and w ( 1 ) .
œkonomie , 1859 , 6 , endeavors to improve on this by calling all values in exchange “ a determinate quantity of thickly curdled working-time , ” meaning by work an averaged _qualitätslose_ , social work of production .
whoever will , will be getting a post-graduate course in financiering and in multiplying of values .
several articles have been written by hawkes advocating the teaching of leadership and values in schools .
an important problem closely connected with the foregoing [ referring to hilbert 's nineteenth problem ] is the question concerning the existence of solutions of partial differential equations when the values on the boundary of the region are prescribed .
a poetic portrait in fiction , with psychological values , of a big cowman and his wife .
those outside this incorporation area came under risk of lower property values and even further reduction in government response and effectiveness .
second , while groups are independent of each other , observations within a group share values on variables , and thus , they are not independent .
rising to the foreground out of our thirty-six , came fielding mason , tall , taciturn , and handsome , with a keen intellect and a sense of values remarkable in so young a man .
advocated the values of non-native speakers as foreign language teachers .
if the love of fair play , a sense of true moral values , and above all , the power and habit of will to act on these can be developed in our boys and girls , it will mean immeasurably for the uplift of the community .
modern hebrew literature ; trends and values .
both editors have changed dates of death to incorrect values , for instance this by sukumar ray and this by lord hallas .
to test mems researchers came up with a wide variety of techniques which can display certain values .
in the simplest case , an optimization problem consists of maximizing or minimizing a real function by systematically choosing input values from within an allowed set and computing the value of the function .
a not inconsiderable total of values .
the maximum values were exceeded twofold in feed and maximally fourfold in some individual eggs .
* * * * * having now described the two main varieties of paper common to the three values of this issue , let us look at some further varieties of the stock used for the 3d .
when hatch marks match , measurement values for the two items are the same .
the adjustments of flat values on the several classes through a series of years , however , as well as the assigning of specific ores to the different classes , have been based on the same factors as are used in _ad valorem_ valuations .
for anna , meeting yves has brought a flurry of excitement to her life and made her question her values , her reliable husband , and her responsibilities to her children .
in particular , residents of the adjacent french city of beausoleil have criticized the building for blocking the views and above all diminishing real estate values .
if clear holoplane reflectors are used , the values for lumens effective on the plane may be increased 10 per cent .
moreover , it was an easy operation ; they had first only to depreciate these values by means of alarming news and then send them soaring up to the highest point by means of optimistic news .
the output informs how emotional factors and rational attributes , consumer benefits , and values come together to form the components of behavioral decision drivers .
in many instances the stock was not purchased in large quantities by the investing public , but was simply issued to promoters , and when values collapsed they only lost so much worthless paper .
it must here be observed that the observations give , not the intensities at different wave-lengths but , the values of these intensities as they are apprehended by the instruments employed -- the eye or the photographic plate .
a good turntable will have wow and flutter values of less than 0 .
however complicated , or however indirect these relations may be , the final object of the calculus always is to obtain from them the values of the unknown quantities by means of those which are known .
the military and economic values of that enterprise so deeply impressed the sculptor of this mammoth frieze that he insisted upon elevating tr into the august company of the other three great statesmen .
many of his recurring foes embody ideals contrary to the american values that captain america is shown to strive for and believe .
the outcome of the abc rejection algorithm is a sample of parameter values approximately distributed according to the desired posterior distribution , and , crucially , obtained without the need of explicitly evaluating the likelihood function ( figure 1 ) .
however , as the 1980s began , differences were more emphasized and noted as a means of progression due the management style differences that came of feminine values and ways of behaving , feeling , and thinking .
inventory records.= when the physical inventory has been taken , the next step is to record quantities and prices , and make the extensions that the record may show total values .
the slump in real estate values and customs receipts which so promptly followed mr. wilson's expression of hope that the frontiers of the united states might soon be contracted , conclusively demonstrated their opinion as to the effect of philippine independence on the peace and prosperity of the country .
the result is that the different parts of his history are of widely varying values .
this leads us to become more aware of the issues , traditions , religions , and core values and cultures of our fellow citizens .
in their visual explorations , david and hi-jin have used film and photography to reframe perception and comment on otherwise unobserved human values as well as overlooked features of our natural environment .
sir isaac newton ’ s assay and representation to the lords of the treasury , in 1717 , of those which he examined , make their values as follows : [ illustration : sir isaac newton ’ s assay , page137 ] the seville piece of eight .
confident in our future and secure in our values , americans are striving forward to embrace the future .
it will accordingly prove of interest to glance through the returns in connection with the trade in these goods , their importation and exportation , commercial values of the same , and the relative consumption of cacao , tea and coffee .
the christian student of the scriptures believes that the bible contains eternal truths for all time , truths which are above time in their spiritual values .
do you see to their comforts , and aid my mother pack up such things as she most values , and i will go myself down to the village for the cart , for i wish to speak with some there . ''
an eye that is trained to detect the values of circumstances , and a hand that is quick to adjust them , have produced the mental forces that make or unmake the race .
we are delighted to find a person who values us as we value ourselves , and distinguishes us from the rest of mankind , with an attention not unlike that with which we distinguish ourselves .
[ 8 ] merchandise passing the boundaries is subject to declaration ; the respective values are stated by a special commission of experts residing in budapest .
willie ’ s fortune melted almost in a moment : this mortgage and that , had to be met and could only be met by forced sales with no buyers except at minimum values .
blessed anne , who had no grasp , she thought , of abstract values , but knew how to make a man able for his work , met the situation quietly .
bar chart picture graph with rectangular bars proportional to the values that they represent , useful for numerical comparisons .
speed of development is commonly defined by the _velocity constant_ , symbolized by κ , which is arrived at mathematically from a consideration of the time of development to produce two different contrast values .
eastern congressmen considered western insistence upon a large volume of currency as a dishonest movement to reduce bond values by legislation .
kt88 , although many other valve types have optimum values close to this .
any hardship connected with these diminished values falls chiefly upon the laborers who fail to adjust their work to the improved method .
energy values very similar to those discovered by the wmap probe for dark energy , dark matter , and baryon matter appear within the theory .
as early as 1874 , one of the miners determined that the brown sand was the lead mineral cerussite , and that the sand also carried high values of silver .
with the natural confusion which ensued between `` credit '' and `` wealth , '' with a new emphasis upon the possible values inherent in `` expectations of wealth '' rather than immediate control over money , an unheard-of speculative emphasis appeared in business .
according to him , even though the existence of a legal system in any sizeable society is essential for the realization of fundamental moral values , law is not inherently moral either in its effects or in its motivational underpinnings .
what the world needs to-day is a rational enthusiasm for human values .
deference should be given only with a justification consistent with democratic values and sufficiently necessary to maintain public order .
take what you want , dear. ” thus came the overthrowal of all corinna ’ s scheme of values .
for the 1907 season , point values were different from those used in contemporary games .
the normal values decrease until the first year of life , remaining relatively stable before they increase again , especially beyond age 50 .
so , for say 100 values , a vector computer that is 100 times slower than a modern scalar computer would get the job done in about the same time .
by the simple opposition of black and white , and through tone values and gradations of shades , he endeavored to create the same feeling of atmosphere and space which he had been able to express with _luo-ts'ing_ .
of course , the function of such writing is to objectify the formal re-counting of deeds , only such performances as are so recognized and carry with them social and ceremonial values being considered worthy of a place in the series .
under the rma all those exercising power have a mandatory obligation to recognise and make provision for māori cultural values in all aspects of resource management when preparing and administering regional and district plans , hemmingsen , s .
eagle values honesty in art above all else .
the extent to which æsthetic values are allowed to colour the resultant or highest good is a point of great theoretic importance , not only for art but for general philosophy .
of course , such a comment shocked howells , whose sense of literary values was much keener than emerson 's .
since the initial values of both and may be freely chosen , the density can be negative .
the french scientist pointed out that from the superconsciousness come inspiration , genius , moral values .
he cited as evidences of this the increased difficulty of negotiating loans on south side realty on any terms , and the fact that some loan companies refused to write them at all , and loan values there had dropped enormously .
[ transcriber 's note -- formula and tables omitted ] this general formula for barrow work can be simplified by choosing average values for the constants , and substituting numerals for the letters now representing them .
compliance with threshold values is monitored by the government-run dce ( direction des communications electroniques ) during annual measurement campaigns , or whenever new mobile radio frequency emitting equipment is brought into service .
supposing a unit of electricity to be carried by the current through the cell , he considered the chemical changes which accompanied its passage , and from the known values of heats of combination calculated their energy values .
new employees are given a challenge coin engraved with the sledgehammer games ' values .
=fictitious values and the railways.= the railroad business deals in a commodity that may be termed public service .
scientific notation was created to handle the wide range of values that occur in scientific study .
there are grave perils in worshipful services corresponding to their supreme values .
the purpose of the school is to educate young people by providing them with the academic and social skills needed for making decisions based on eternal values , while cultivating a discriminating intelligence necessary for becoming responsible citizens of the world .
at the present time we realize that these courses are all related , and all work together through correlation and interrelation to supply the child with those worth while educational values which aid in meeting social , vocational , and leisure-time needs of life .
hence we only mark out the points whose grayscale values are above 225 .
the triplet indication may also apply to notes of different values , for example a quarter note followed by one eighth note , in which case the quarter note may be regarded as two triplet eighths tied together .
the hercules mine provided a full six-percent of the nations lead , and also produced good values in silver .
based on temple 's many screen successes , zanuck increased budgets and production values for her films .
this separation would then enable the scientist to identify the proteins according to their published pi and mw values or subject them to further separation or identification using mass spectrometry .
digital oscilloscopes usually analyze waveforms and provide numerical values as well as visual displays .
these values are used in the following method of finding out whether you may consider yourself as lucky or not .
innumerable reflections were aroused in the mind of the master rodin when he essayed to place his treasures : the effect of the changing light on the object , the balancing of values , the relation of proper proportions , the appearance of the object in full light .
in other words , it is the frame of mind produced by poetry , the `` thought hardly to be packed into the narrow act '' , no less than the prompting to this action or to that , which sidney values in the work of the poet .
suslin invariant is a dimension 3 invariant of a special linear group of a central simple algebra of rank n taking values in the tensor square of the group of nth roots of unity .
holditch values it at two hundred and thirty pounds ; and , if it was n't a family ring , i 'd have taken the money .
the soldier who would like to escape from shell fire is , so far as moral values are concerned , in the same position as a man in peace-time who will not venture his life to save a drowning child .
when some packages , like pspp or microsiris , read in or import the original data set , the packages will recognize that those values are missing , and do their calculations accordingly .
suppose , for instance , that the values of tan x in § 6 extended only from x = 60° to x = 80° , we could then complete the table of differences by making the entries shown in italics below .
as wage earners are universally creditors , according to prevailing customs , they suffer most in a depreciation of money values : i. e. , they work for dollars at one value and a week or a month later receive them to expend at a less value .
these values in gold tremisses would then have been consistent with that of the full-grown four-year-old ox as stated in tit .
in canada , densities are generally slightly higher than in australia , but below typical european values .
the truths which it enunciated were then as unfamiliar as the false values on which it also reposed .
affiliated with the roman catholic church , the university promotes catholic and franciscan values .
the series consists of the following values and colors .
this assignment can be uniquely extended to an assignment of truth values to all propositional formulas .
these village wall papers sought to build literacy among a largely illiterate population and to inculcate pro-regime values among the rural population .
our system includes as one of its five core values ignore all rules and we explicitly reject overly legalistic frameworks for interpreting how to run the encyclopedia .
his inspiration to form the baltimore blues as a rugby league club is based on the values of family , honor , heart and friendship .
once again , you must do this with repeated values for n because some loops depend on the size of n to determine how many times the loop is processed .
although the matter before us concerns the domestication of animals , it may be well to devote a little attention to the question of the wild plants which need protection or which promise to afford unwon values .
what errors in political economy and statesmanship are committed in consequence of the over-estimation or under-estimation of particular values , or the non-estimation of some among them !
most universal life policies come with an option to take a loan on certain values associated with the policy .
a program that focuses on the ways different people from times have developed their values and traditions .
the series of proportional values is given on page 403 .
the following table shows the relative trade values of phosphoric acid in different manures : -- i. -- wolff , 1893 .
in classical mathematics , characteristic functions of sets only take values 1 ( members ) or 0 ( non-members ) .
i value it as one values what one has lost . ''
for example , consistency theories , which imply that we must be consistent in our beliefs and values .
your image is simply packed with text and specified values of points and positions on the axis .
it is quite possible that the values of my instruction are over-estimated by many ... . do you mind if i sit down a moment ?
other systems for assigning values to braille patterns are also followed , beside the simple mapping of the alphabetical order onto the original french order .
there have been strikes brought forth by `` hard times , '' strikes occasioned by efforts at organization of workers , and strikes whose distant origin lay in the economic overturn incident to war inflation with its topsy-turvy of values and its jumble of the normal status .
briar hill and belgravia are both modest areas with house values and average incomes in the lower quadrant compared with the toronto average .
they were dubbed the mitteldruckmotor ( medium-pressure engines ) because of their unusually high bmep ( mean effective pressure , as calculated from brake torque ) values , which led to a good thermodynamic effiency .
gerard 's family league , an association of christians united in prayer for their own and other families , to preserve christian values in their home and family life .
its value must be made up of the values of the parts or elements plus an added value that comes from the operation of the whole .
it is possible , with the classicists , to condemn outright this blurring of values .
with kenny 's usual sense of values there was one brief sentence relative to some materials for work .
_give the numerical values of l._ 50 in roman , and 30 in semitic notation .
he had a lawyer 's perception of the values of words as words , and through extended practice with mrs. hilliard excelled in that deft juggling of pregnant trifles without which platonic friendships must die of inanition .
von sterneck and mendenhall pendulums while scientists who had used the repsold-bessel pendulum apparatus discussed its defects and limitations for gravity surveys , maj. robert von sterneck of austria-hungary began to develop an excellent apparatus for the rapid determination of relative values of gravity .
there are some , however , who are both frank enough and bold enough to announce their belief in the radical doctrine which demands a complete transformation of essential values .
each of these values have their own distribution function which can be combined with a random number generator to create a theoretical sample of stars .
of estimated values .
offering citizens access to state-held information is " one of the most effective ways of upholding the constitutional values of transparency , openness , participation and accountability .
rgb values packed into a hexadecimal string suitable for html outputfunction p .
the proportion between the values of gold and silver is a mercantile problem altogether .
david mcclelland ( the achieving society , 1967 ) approached this subject from the psychological perspective , with his motivations theory , arguing that modernisation cannot happen until a given society values innovation , striving for improvement and entrepreneurship .
the fifth column proves that the experiments are truly represented by the formula : in each of the experiments 7 and 8 , the difference between the calculated and observed values amounts to 0·1 lb. , but this is quite inconsiderable in comparison with the weights we are employing .
as thus defined the critical temperatures for iron , nickel and cobalt were found to be 780° , 360° and 1090° respectively , but these values are not quite independent of the magnetizing force .
windhoek afrikaanse privaatskool strives to develop pupils within the scope of quality education in afrikaans using christian values .
this kind of paper has been decided by the supreme court to be _money_ , the '' measure of values . ''
aa 's ) is provided to the non half hourly data aggregator , which aggregates the individual values provided into a single figure split in a number of ways e .
the hattinger model , for the continuation of the smithy in hattingen ) tried to save jobs , but the dresder bank refuse to sell its collateral values to the rescue company .
from the bibliographical standpoint it is excellent , but the safest guides to mere market values are the quarterly records of auction-sale prices entitled 'book-auction records , ' and the bi-monthly publication known as 'book-prices current ' issued by mr. elliot stock .
statistical models contain the mathematical proof of the parametric values and their probability distributions .
law-making and hierarchies of values .
for example , a square root function might be defined to operate on reals , complex values or matrices .
hicp outlier " , the polish source accordingly also adjusted their " hicp outlier selection criteria " from april 2014 onwards , so that it now automatically classify " all states with hicp criteria values minimum 1 .
documentaries such as super size me paint a grotesque picture of what our society values as far as fat is concerned and the need for change that is associated with it .
all good newspaper reporters have two qualifications well developed ; they are able to recognize news values -- having `` a nose for news , '' it is called -- and they are able to run down a `` story '' with the instinct of a detective .
he values human reason so highly that , whatever advantages he may have on earth , he is not content if he is not also ranked highly in the judgment of man .
this really is covered by the `` going concern values , '' as defined by messrs. mead and alvord .
i know too well to what extent the art of egypt was the product of a people reared by a definite set of inviolable values , to hope to transplant it with any chance of success on to our democratic and anarchical soil .
`` this most entertainingly as well as carefully written volume has for one of its best values the attention it gives to that most untrampled , and yet peculiarly alluring domain of bird lore -- the stream and the lake , the sea-beach and the wave .
gradually it absorbed various elements and influences , from native reverence for ancestral and natural spirits , hindu and buddhist dharmic civilization , to islamic values , and to lesser extent , christianity also western philosophy and modern ideas .
both these facts are of very frequent occurrence ; and in most instances of emotion both no doubt occur together : but they are obviously quite distinct , and the distinction is of the utmost importance for a correct estimate of values .
riegl demonstrates that some of these values conflict and argues that they may be culturally contingent .
ultimately , folklorists identify motifs in folklore to interpret where , how , and why these motifs are used , so they can understand the values , customs , and ways of life of unique cultures .
if there are tied values , assign to each tied value the average of the ranks that would have been assigned without ties .
accounting analysis of product unit values , i .
there seems to be a common average of three values as an acceptable and agreeable contrast .
ieds works to find effective mechanisms for ascribing , communicating , and implementing values that minimize conflict .
he values the craft of match-making because a good match-maker can arrange suitable marriages and friendship between cities .
any attempt to formulate a general proposition about superiority either attaches purely arbitrary values to different kinds of activity or is absurd from the standpoint of the most elementary logic .
moreover , in such case masculine selection makes only too often for economic rather than for human values in the wife .
for small values of tilt , , so the error is minimal ; for large values of tilt , the denominator should be .
quaker values such as community , service , equality and integrity are all incorporated into student life .
asset values however , have not returned to their pre-crisis highs .
numerically odd values may be preferred so that processors without byte addressing will fault when attempting to use them as pointers ( which must fall at even addresses ) .
while i heartily support the european union and its values , the existance of an entire seperate enthnicity ( and culture ) will require more than that reference to confirm ( take a look at the istro-romanians , for example ) .
the novel interweaves scenes at and near a neighborhood movie theatre , using movies as a touchstone for exploring catholic values in a changing world , where the cinema introduces values and behaviors from the greater society that differ from those of the traditional community .
but further , in this view , and in the view of the best students of jurisprudence in general , the legal values are not an insulated , self-contained system .
he examined the long history of the prohibition of suicide and concludes that it reflects part of the fundamental values of society and so could not be in violation of fundamental justice .
through the comic strip , riebe assailed the afl , the socialist party , and bourgeois values .
* * * * * in closing the present description of the basis , nature , and scope of the doctrine of evolution , i find great difficulty in choosing the right words for a concise statement of the larger values and results of this department of science .
market timers attempt to avoid these problems by looking for clusters of parameter values that work well or by using out-of-sample data , which ostensibly allows the market timer to see how the system works on unforeseen data .
as surveyor and valuer to advise his employers on the values , & c. , of corporate or other property .
because of this , there is a possibility of developing a wrong sense of values in the religious life .
besides , those single formes she doth esteeme , and in her ballance doth their values trie ; where some things good , and some things ill doe seem , and neutrall some , in her _fantasticke_ [ 131 ] eye .
as wealth and population increase in chicago , values of property decline .
to show the possibilities of working the different metals , and their relative spinning values , a number of articles made from different materials are illustrated herewith .
the template automatically adds the units " mi " and " km " after the values .
they did it three times between 1918 and 1942 , and each time in crisis , when they thought the material values which they wished to substitute as the goal of struggle were enhanced by their very absence .
during that time some colours were changed to comply with universal postal union regulations , and three new values were added .
these values are small when compared with steel which has a modulus of elasticity of about 30,000,000 pounds per square inch .
the question of the relations among values we shall discuss rather briefly , not that it is unimportant , but that much of it is familiar .
standard values have not been established .
`` i get bored , of course : that is incidental to life , and chronic with one who has looked beneath the surface and sifted values .
the smallest quantity is consumed in the balearic islands , where the tobacco consumed by each male values three pesetas and a half .
labor , not skill , is the just and equitable measure of values .
do not trade long-term values like character and dignity for temporary bravado and the in-your-face mentality .
ireland have long been based on common ancestral ties and shared values .
current values for xys compared to other aussie falcons , and their competitors , attest to this .
there is a standard deviation associated with each species , but these values are not given .
in this , he made a fervent urgent appeal and declared that the teaching of islam inculcates respect and reverence for each other 's religious values and sensibilities .
he now pretends that we have to accept the radical historicity of human beings including pluralism of norms and values without ignoring the undeniable intimations of ultimate , universal core principles that rule our daily life .
only once in a great while there is a stately poem in it , or its leaves are illuminated with the glories of art , or they enfold a draft for untold values signed by the million-fold millionnaire old mother herself .
change to one of the valid values , for instance .
s. r. ward visited the colony in the early fifties he found that instead of lowering land values of adjoining property as some had predicted would result from establishing a negro colony in kent county , the buxton settlement had actually raised the value of adjoining farms .
the student should study some reliable hand book on the relative values of food and use his judgment .
for the coal burned per hour for any size stack given in the table , the values should be multiplied by 5 .
for the enumeration of all possible solutions , two solutions are considered distinct if any of their corresponding ( 81 ) cell values differ .
no , you can 't set up a dropdown list but since the values you are putting in are quite short , it would probably be easiest to just put them in directly .
the temporal differentiation of alternate measures is of the same extent as in the preceding group , namely , 1.000:0.991. the proportional quantitative values of the measure and its constituent intervals , taken in series of ten successive repetitions , are as follow : table xxxvii .
it does not adhere to the values of our republic and democracy .
lieutenant golightly , in the story which bears his name , is a prig who values himself for spotless attire and clockwork precision of manner ; he therefore is mauled and muddied up to his eyes , and then arrested under painfully derogatory conditions .
it is a two-dimensional box in which associated with ratio values in which pair values of each risk ratios ( xi , yi ) are represented as cartesian coordinates .
desired variables are specified in variable bindings ( values are not used ) .
i have said that it begins with the unconscious altering of the values of certain scriptural stories , owing to the preponderance of detail over accessory .
because wikipedia also values neutrality we ask that people that have a close connection to a subject , and thus may have their view of that subject colored by their proximity to it , refrain from editing about it .
the measured values of k display a strong dispersion .
the terms of these exchanges , the prices , are governed by values , social economic values , in no wise different from the values which govern the prices in exchanges which we do not class as credit transactions .
the antecedent values function only as _persisting_ , as _contemporary_ social forces .
table h-3 provides examples of protection values for well-sealed shelters .
this may be seen in inflammatory bowel disease , abnormally low mpv values correlate primarily with thrombocytopenia when it is due to impaired production as in aplastic anemia .
the government pledges to promote islamic values among its muslim citizens , to protect marriage and the family and to oppose obscenity .
't is the head he values ; it 's his favourite toy . '
i did not see it then , in my exalted mood of idealized emotion ; but i do n't suppose a woman values any reputation less than one for altruistic charm .
the first meaning refers to a social philosophy or political philosophy which values rural society as superior to urban society , the independent farmer as superior to the paid worker , and sees farming as a way of life that can shape the ideal social values .
the stamp is identical with the two and ten cent values , with the value changed , and the portrait of taylor from the six ounce tobacco stamp of the `` series of 1871 , '' placed in the medallion .
fantasy themes are common creative interpretations of events that reflect beliefs , values , and goals of the organization .
6 , l. 188 , 9 , describing “ a present for the emperor ; ” “ tis plate , of rare device ; and jewels of rich and exquisite form ; their values great. ” so spenser , _faerie queene_ , iv .
analog forestry has the potential to produce very high values of photosynthetic biomass as its design calls for the inclusion of all the growth forms that occupy the three-dimensional space of the mature indigenous forest .
an overall strategy should include a streamlined regulatory process , a global program of monitoring for unknown or evolving biological pathogens , temporary moratoriums , raising public awareness , international cooperation , software reconnaissance , and fostering values of liberty , tolerance , and respect for knowledge and diversity .
but what values can we attribute to beliefs and judgments , except is so far as they are aids and instruments for obtaining valuable objects ?
i 've got some ' logic50 ' values for my antagonists but if i take the antilog of these , what are the values that i 'm left with .
things may so fill the public mind that the real values of the various elements that enter into life may become distorted .
national geographic encouraged readers to question western values and identify with others .
`` not that he values your accomplishments more , but patti 's less , '' observed nevins , placidly .
for all values of its argument or arguments . ''
there are 5 values , whose sum is 60 and the sum of whose squares is 765 .
the royal ballet was one of the foremost ballet companies of the 20th century , and continues to be one of the world 's most famous ballet companies to this day , generally noted for its artistic and creative values .
comparative values of agricultural produce .
roberto eisenmann , in recognition of the history of the founder of la prensa as a promoter of democratic and civic values that postulates the organization , composed of over 300 media in the americas .
it does not promise anything ; it does not offer to contribute new values to human life .
v if art may be said to create values , religion has been said to conserve them .
to the bolshevik mind , with its furious hatred of constructive ability and its fanatical determination to enforce levelling , proletarian equality , the very existence of superior biological values is a crime .
vowels of middle english had " continental " values much like those remaining in spanish and liturgical latin .
during this time in europe , pharmacies fancied displaying the names and values of animals .
with this arrangement , it was hoped to obtain favorable values for the single-engined flight .
let none answer , as he values his life ; press forward ' ; and they continued their march with silence and rapidity .
they have seen the scale of values upon which their civilized life was so carefully based swept away and replaced by another strange and grim to which their minds must rigidly conform .
common values limit the resulting amplification to between 3 and 4 .
this innovation creates a more competent sharing of each other 's potentials and resources thereby accomplishing its core values and education thrusts .
this term may be a sum of as many as sixteen separate velocity and position dependent terms , since the repeated indices μ and ν are by convention summed over all pairs of their four allowed values .
in manufacturing industry , pwi values are used to calibrate the heating and cooling of soldering jobs ( known as a thermal profile ) while baked in a reflow oven .
while planes of relief , varied form and surface , values of light and shade , and accidental characteristics are rather the object with the graphic draughtsman , typical form and structure , and recurring line and mass , are sought for by the ornamentist .
he saw her tainted , bruised , beaten down in the struggle , losing little by little all sense of the holy values of wife , mother , home .
the dhyanalinga offers a unique set of activities throughout the year aimed at creating and promoting universal values and religious harmony .
unicode code points as surrogates for larger values .
i am sure mr. furze values you highly . ''
money values differed .
proudhon follows rodbertus , who taught that the products only and not their values are provided by labour .
since the context of each country differs in terms of institutional capacity , political ideologies , financial resources , economic structure and cultural values , each floor is defined by individual countries .
the purpose of this remark is to preclude a discussion of the problem of the government purchase of railways on the basis of the values submitted in this report .
( f ) taxation of the increase ( `` increment '' ) of urban land values , periodically or on the occasion of transfer of ownership .
the social model implies that practices such as eugenics are founded on social values and a prejudiced understanding of the potential and value of those labeled disabled .
his works convey the need to move away from the strong traditional values , especially of the minangkabau people 's and embrace the development of the period , and .
alternatively , cultural relativistic positions have been put forth mostly by socialization theories which focus on how cultures transmit values rather than what values are applied across groups and individuals .
the selectquery aggregates the minimum , maximum and average temperature values over a one second time period , returning a continuous stream of aggregated results at one second intervals .
the values obtained for a seem largely dependent on the station .
chapter xvii - envelopment and color perspective allied to values is the idea of envelopment : of a kindred notion to this is aerial perspective .
virtues of " chukun aikoku " ( loyalty to the emperor and love of country ) were values most brought with them into the army as their intellectual baggage .
ta98 and fmathe values for the ta code and fma identifier are specified in wikidata .
_the law of the motion of the center of gravity is rigorously true only if applied to the entire universe._ but then , to get from it the values of the masses , it would be necessary to observe the motion of the center of gravity of the universe .
the absolute magnitude values are not cited .
for broadcasting and recording studios and conference rooms , values under one second are frequently used .
handbook of parenting and the transmission of values .
after the destruction second world war had brought upon makati , the town grew rapidly , and real estate values boomed .
having the key independent of all other columns insulates the database relationships from changes in data values or database design ( making the database more agile ) and guarantees uniqueness .
for the redemptorist , the three vows challenge those values presented as being important by modern day society .
since in systems of two components the two phases , solution and vapour , constitute a bivariant system , the vapour pressure is undefined , and may have different values at the same temperature , depending on the concentration .
makes it possible to set values in the float format ( e .
study of cookbooks had led to the study of food values .
in that case two values of x would arise for the same value or values of the quotient y2/y1 , arising from two different branches of this quotient .
) , those that are finite in the number of values or solutions , that is , in which the conditions of the problem or equation determine the number .
these characters serve as the canvas upon which the values and lifestyle of the new popular consumer society are sketched .
when imposed on an ordinary or a partial differential equation , it specifies the values that the derivative of a solution is to take on the boundary of the domain .
from the perspective of utilitarianism , protected values are biases when they prevent utility from being maximized across individuals .
he tries to insert these values are completely misleading and false .
a phase of rapid increase in the amount of underestimation appears in the fifth or final position , represented on the above scale of relative values by 120 .
there are 120 tiles ( instead of 100 ) and the values differ from the swedish scrabble set .
it had a separate issue in 1922 of overprinted leeward islands stamps ( 11 values ) .
instead it is necessary to keep auxiliary lists of tail values as appropriate .
like the abs-cbn wheel , i made this template myself mainly using microsoft powerpoint to make the wheel and the values ( which use the chesterfield font ) .
the first three are passing grades , with values as explained in chapter i , and d represents failure .
although the subjects may have had moral values , many were criticized on whether they were a truly moral character .
the conference has set out the critical necessity of the development within industry itself of a better basis of understanding as having the great values that all prevention has over cures .
a wrap facilitator is an individual who has been trained and certified to teach and instruct the principles , values and ethics of wellness recovery .
perhaps the truth was that she had in her , after all , something of mildred lorimer 's feeling for values and conventions ; having flown from florence to córdoba to her lover she was reclaiming a little of her aloofness and cool ladyhood by this discipline .
and there 's one last pillar of our leadership , and that 's the example of our values .
other sources of burgers and other choices from the menu will obviously have different values , but i think a double quarter pounder with cheese , medium fries and a medium coke is a pretty typical order from mcdonalds .
then the interface forces , same as for the subdomain correction , are applied to find the values of the coarse correction at subdomain corners .
data acquisition systems ( abbreviated with the acronym das or daq ) typically convert analog waveforms into digital values for processing .
[ sidenote : mill on the business of life and the occupation of mind ] these various values of the power of thought may be summed up in the following quotation from john stuart mill .
the solid shot gun would once again have the advantage ; in fact , that very equilibrium of relative values which m. paixhans was endeavouring to destroy would once more obtain between the navies of the two rival powers .
in the conversation of his artist friends there was no enlightenment , for they talked about `` values '' and `` planes of modeling '' and the mysteries of `` tone . ''
the catalogue gives two distinct sorts of paper -- laid and wove -- for all three values , with a sub-variety of the latter , designated `` thin '' , for the 3d and 6d denominations .
she values no relic of him more unless it be the wreath of oak-leaves that she made him for `` coriolanus . ''
it is a microcosm full of intricacy ; the nucleus is often exceedingly definite and coherent ; the early cells are often from the first defined , with prospective values which do not change .
_the bishop of bath and wells values the book._ '' i beg to acknowledge , with very many thanks , the receipt of your letter and the volume of your work , 'in darkest england , ' which you have been so good as to send me .
it may therefore be said that natural existence produces and sustains some values , -- at least the minimal value which is identical with the bare existence of mankind -- on its own account , but no more .
in general , in the case of moral values , the individual emotion and the social value are _qualitatively_ comparable , since moral values rarely take on a highly institutional character .
schools taught religious values and applied calvinist philosophies of discipline which included corporal punishment and public humiliation .
the war has already taught us many things , and among the most important is the need for a new adjustment of social and economic values .
for mark twain was not simply living the bourgeois life now ; he had adopted all the values and ideals of the bourgeoisie .
i should like to add that in the first large-scale application the titer values and blood were examined .
traditionally , database systems estimate selectivities through fairly detailed statistics on the distribution of values in each column , such as histograms .
there are various other moneys not taken in account , that have their special values and uses paramount .
that combination of fellowship and its humor , together with a complete impersonality which yet exquisitely takes account of all human personality and variously values it , was something which i had never before known in any man .
_d_ , dial : records color values in terms of standard white ( 100 ) , the opposite end of the scale being absolute blackness ( 0 ) .
the rose is wont with pride to swell , and ever seeks to rise ; but gentle sweethearts love full well the lily 's charms to prize , the heart that fills a bosom true , that is , like me , unsullied too , my merit values duly .
although she still believes in the values of social equality and cooperation that characterized the kibbutz in its early years , hanna struggles to maintain her usefulness and sense of worth in a society undergoing a sudden and profound transformation .
in the present state of popular mind , there is no doubt but property values are depreciated by the presence of negro tenants or property owners in residential sections .
all feature conflict between parents , particularly domineering fathers , and their lively adult children who repudiate the values and conventions to which their parents hold .
it has sometimes drawn criticism as an elite group that represents the interests of only its members in preserving the neighborhood 's high property values at the expense of the city as a whole .
the rearrangement of values is the transition from a frame of mind in which the satisfactions are via the “ passive ” route to those via the active route .
lisa was raised in a religious family with strong christian values and believes .
relaxation in general is a delay or lag in the response of a linear system , and therefore dielectric relaxation is measured relative to the expected linear steady state ( equilibrium ) dielectric values .
as a result , though the questions he raised are still in part unsettled , a great change in assigned values has since been effected not only in these nations , but in most other nations and lands which have drawn the inspiration for their educational systems from them .
however if you are going to solder steel ( which is likely for those values ) , you are going to need to use a special acid flux in order to get the solder to stick to it .
there was a larger number who took the ground that the exchange had not closed soon enough , and urged that had the step been taken a few days sooner a considerable decline in values would have been prevented .
centennial programs , in which societies across the world are connected in the pursuit for global ethics , and shared values in order to overcome problems placed on the national boundaries .
there , sybil , see how he values your good opinion .
the former is now 60 feet wide throughout ; it is by far the more important thoroughfare at present , land values are much higher than on forbes street , and new and somewhat costly buildings are already crowding out the cheap houses of an older generation .
astronomers usually express distances in units of parsecs ( parallax arcseconds ) ; light-years are used in popular media , but almost invariably values in light-years have been converted from numbers tabulated in parsecs in the original source .
these proportions , however , refer to the weights and not to the nutritive values of the products compared .
see values , prices .
these are the values by which we intend to be assessed " .
the bunyakovsky conjecture ( or bouniakowsky conjecture ) stated in 1857 by the russian mathematician viktor bunyakovsky , asserts when a polynomial f ( x ) in one variable with positive degree and integer coefficients should have infinitely many prime values for positive integer inputs .
our reorganized school systems show what a specific educational value manual training has , not alone in the manual skill which the child attains , but also in the mental , moral and economic values which it gains .
they will thus use floating-point-specific microprocessor operations on those values ( floating-point addition , multiplication , etc .
exploring ethics through movies , said that walt originally is a " moral absolutist " who believes that values are universal and do not differ at all even if the context is different .
on this point he approaches conflict theory , although he does believe that institutions and values can be functional for society as a whole .
christopher guy furniture designs reflect a contemporary mood with classic values .
`` he durst not for his soul 's salvation , and for his daily bread , which he values much more , say such a word , boy ; therefore , take care what you assert , '' said my reverend father .
supports boolean values in any part of the query .
these formulae give , in the case of k = 0.1a , values certain to eight logarithmic decimal places .
will not the next step in religion be the relinquishment of the supernatural and the active appreciation of virtues and values ?
however , the neighbors are upset and think their property values will go down because of ruth 's new occupants .
he also talked about jade ( the protagonist from the original game ) and said that he really hopes that she will continue to keep her values and her personality .
in 1726 , under louis xv 's minister cardinal fleury , a system of monetary stability was put in place , leading to a strict conversion rate between gold and silver , and set values for the coins in circulation in france .
for the two red suits , hearts and diamonds , only the king , queen , and knave keep their values in natural order ; the other cards have their order of values reversed .
to `` lose your soul '' is to suffer everlasting damage which can not be repaired or substituted by values of the world .
in babylon this system of writing became even more complicated by the fact that different meanings and different phonetic values were ascribed to the same cuneiform groups .
meantime , the theories of '' international values , '' as explained by modern political economy , have brought about last year 's pillage of france by germany , and the affectionate relations now existing in consequence between the inhabitants of the right and left banks of the rhine .
( _new york , 1894_ ) _net_ 2 0 =a treatise on the comparative commercial values of gas coals and cannels.= by d. a. graham .
the conspicuous german philosopher of later years , nietzsche , with a naïve simplicity insists that the great need of our modern civilization is that which he designates as `` the transvaluation of all values . ''
good track geometry including advanced spirals is likely to foster passenger acceptance of higher cd values .
e ) be its ℤ-graded a-cochains with values in e .
by serving as spiritual leader for a group of gifted , ( married ) men antoinette broke with the established norms and values of her time .
gold would stand at its true and natural value as a metal ; and all other things would also stand at their true and natural values , for their respective uses .
martorell 's outstanding novel of chivalry tirant lo blanc ( 1490 ) shows a transition from medieval to renaissance values , something that can also be seen in metge 's work .
data can be exported in a comma-separated values spreadsheet , icalendar format , json or rss feed .
these values are maximum values , and actual values may be slower under certain conditions ( for example , noisy phone lines ) .
chile is a member of the international postal union , and has arrangements with the principal commercial nations for the exchange of postal money values .
he knew the values of ink and the correct chemical to affect them .
to-day they possess little functional value , and their claim for admission into the school curriculum is chiefly based upon their so-called training and disciplinary values .
to close the recognized public market for securities , the market which is organized and safeguarded and depended upon as a standard of values , is an undertaking of great responsibility in any community .
the size of uid values varies amongst different systems ; some unix os 's used 15-bit values , allowing values up to 32767 , while others such as linux supported 16-bit uids , making 65536 unique ids possible .
starting with the experimental values of p , for a standard projectile , fired under standard conditions in air of standard density , we proceed to the construction of the ballistic table .
supporters of regulation argue that by implementing a regulated market system , prices for organs would actually be lower than current black market values since an increased supply drives prices down .
with the varying conditions to be met with in this apparatus , it is necessary that varying values should be assigned at times to j and to _r_ .
the battle for verdun was a battle for moral rather than military values , and the moral victory remains with the french .
our ideal girl will learn food values and how food should be prepared .
however , due to a competing reaction of taed with hydroxide anions ( saponification ) , two equivalents is not quite achieved , and various values have been measured such as 1 .
these values , plus the curves , provide the data by means of which the proteins of the birds may be compared .
the " returns " are not profits , but output values .
hd embraces a set of values that foster integrity , professionalism and respect for diversity in all areas of its work .
in software , describes values of a function which are not in its ` natural ' range of return values , but are rather signals that some kind of exception has occurred .
the ashkenazi jewish g2a1a men with northeastern european origins almost all have yca values of 21,21 and a dys19 value of 16 .
the format parameter can take nine values .
junis also has an ethics policy that upholds konservative values .
for six weeks he was convinced that swinburne had said the last word , a blighting word , on ethical values .
the measurement of weights and lengths involves physical manipulation ; the measurement of values is an intellectual operation , made by comparing two objects of value .
now the individual reckons with these social values in the same way that he reckons with any other of the facts affecting the economy of his life .
thus the term “ shade ” should be applied only to darkened values , and not to hues or chromas .
this line of reasoning , however , assumes that the opponent values its civilians over its military forces .
in the time domain , the cause is an impulse response that oscillates , assuming negative values .
in fact , for any given macrostate , there will be a huge number of microstates that are consistent with the given values of e , v , etc .
in turn , the electric field gradient opens the way to description of bonding modes in molecules when the qcc values are accurately determined by nmr or nqr methods .
shermer criticises historical religious justifications for women being burned alive on suspicion of being witches , the support of slavery , cruelty to animals , mistreatment of women and homophobia , and argues the spread of scientific and englightened values has created a better foundation for civil society .
“ _b._ exploitation of the country and securing its economic values for use by german industry ( see par .
we have a 4-dimensional differentiable manifold m , a gauge group g , which has as " dynamical " fields a two-form b taking values in the adjoint representation of g , and a connection form a for g .
church and preacher have , to a large degree , relinquished their essential message , dropped their religious values .
their basic values are in the main ethical , and are ensconced in the rituals prescribed in the priestly texts of the pentateuch .
hexadecimal to octal conversion proceeds by first converting the hexadecimal digits to 4-bit binary values , then regrouping the binary bits into 3-bit octal digits .
high tobin 's q values encourage companies to invest more in capital because they are " worth " more than the price they paid for them .
he feels that some pleasures are better than others , and determines their respective values by the degree in which they possess that quality which all recognise but none can define -- goodness .
it is full of treasures , of values which can not be told , or was , rather , for the powers that be have mysteriously spirited them away , and the priceless stained glass windows have been boarded up—the very most priceless of all has been taken down .
as shown above , lcgs do not always use all of the bits in the values they produce .
velocity related values are evaluated according the new second .
the maximum speed of the vehicle or missile ; this is usually the road speed , but other values may be indicated if appropriate .
in mexican train dominoes , a player has an opportunity to play , in a single turn , as many dominoes as he can , matching values end to end in a line .
where passive components come in surface mount packages , their values will be identified with printed alphanumeric codes instead of a color code .
metabolomics data sets produced by high throughput analytical chemistry techniques typically consist of large matrices containing multiple values for multiple samples .
makor rishon ( , " primary source " ) is an israeli daily newspaper , identified with conservative national and religious values .
already , nuts are being pressed into service as rapidly as production permits , and perhaps more so than prices and comparative food values justify .
the sum of the values of the tiles played in the turn is the score for the turn .
yet commercial values were canvassed .
in table iv the present retail prices ( sept. , 1921 ) and the food values of a number of different fishes are compared .
similarly for the larger purpose of ecclesiastical polity , agencies like monasticism and missionary enterprise were employed , which conserved the shibboleth values of chiliasm and were free from its defects as an instrument of hierarchical ambition .
the full laplace transform is the curve of all present values , plotted as a function of interest rate .
the dual-beta model does not assume that upside beta and downside betas are the same but actually calculates what the values are for the two betas , thus allowing investors to make better-informed investing decisions .
the 3d nature of doms ( multiple values for each x , y position ) results in a form of data that is not suitable for inputting to most geographical information systems .
most gem diamonds are traded on the wholesale market based on single values for each of the four cs ; for example knowing that a diamond is rated as 1 .
now have these funguses of yours any special medicinal values , for example ? ''
since i forget how to parse math stuff , you can calculate those values .
land values , decrease of , 302 ; sources of , 297 ; variation , 300 .
it is doubtless most expedient that many servants of the crown should be also servants of the people ; and no man who values the constitution would separate the functions of ministers of state from those of legislators .
wagner , allow me to add , was a typical representative of the nineteenth century , which was the century of contradictory values , of opposed instincts , and of every kind of inner disharmony .
suffice to say , you seem to live in a world which values cliff richard and the shadows , and stops there .
but i know she values me -- and so did my poor master .
these `` confessions '' reveal him in the process of revaluing the values of life and art for himself .
sociology , just as any other natural science , accepts the current values of the community .
later pb-5j was introduced which increased the tjd field to 16 bits , allowing values up to 65535 , which will occur in the year 2147 .
japanese who adopted western values were ridiculed , women who rejected a tradition of subservience were attacked .
the pieces can have a simple one-colored background or a multi-colored backgrounds in which the paint swirls together or fades from one color to the other through a series of differing values of each color .
since then , only five more of these values have been found .
the confiscated palaces , forests , lands , and fisheries , the proceeds from the sale of american ships , values of every kind , were all made the private property of the emperor .
the greatest pressure to hold timber values down in the past have been our land laws ; first the federal laws for the sale of timber , second the state laws for taxes -- and lack of all laws for protection and planting .
there are very considerable differences between the values assigned by different observers , sometimes no doubt due to differences in method , but in most cases unquestionably depending on variations in the quality of the specimens examined .
applications of two values are numberless ; i will mention a few of them to give the student some clues for original research and experiment .
the leading men became interested when they began to realize its effect on real estate values .
and very substantial values is la france getting out of the légionnaire .
ocaml 's standard library module hashtbl implements a hash table where it 's possible to store multiple values for a key .
the same now appears as one of the particular values of a completely indeterminate magnitude .
these areas are largely exclusive and upper class with top private and public schools , high family incomes , well established christian church communities , and with high real estate values .
but during this same period , old-fashioned values were still embraced in such hits as annie , 42nd street , my one and only , and popular revivals of no , no , nanette and irene .
this is in contrast with standard treatment , where a free bid can show unlimited values and is unconditionally forcing .
the algorithms then adjust the weights , instead of adjusting the values associated with the individual state-action pairs .
exchange was effected by barter , cowries of different values being the prototype of coins , which were cast in greater or less quantity under each reign .
a fair average of the retail values of fuels and of electrical energy and an average luminous efficiency of the light-sources involved have been used in making the computations .
the country buses did not have turnstiles , but used " autofare " ticket machines , which issued tickets to different values .
each conservation easement is carefully crafted to meet the needs of the landowner while not jeopardizing the conservation values of the land .
for clean pipes darcy found these values [ alpha ] = .004346 [ alpha ] 1 = .0003992 [ beta ] = .0010182 [ beta ] 1 = .000005205 .
why the polish exiles can not escape -- narrative of a attempt by m. bohdanovitch -- encounter with a bear -- sanitary arrangements in siberia -- wolf hunts -- a blue fox -- different values of furs -- a few words on the passion for displaying riches .
early polish nationalism , or protonationalism , was related to the polish-lithuanian identity , represented primarily by the polish nobility ( szlachta ) , and their cultural values ( such as the golden freedoms ) .
_h_ under “ purchases ” are entered the cost values of all merchandise sent to the various departments , that is , the difference between the footings of the dr. and cr .
the heritage alliance , a prominent conservative values organization , gave representative straus a 52 percent conservative score ( the second to the lowest score earned by a republican ) .
the lengths of the neumes were given values by adding up the duration values for the separate neume elements , each time following a particular hypothesis concerning the rhythm of gregoriant chant .
at a three-day strategic planning conference in may 1997 , it was decided that a political movement should be established capable of unifying people around shared values across racial , historical , ideological and social dividing lines .
in contrast to the ordinary arima process , the " difference parameter " , d , is allowed to take non-integer values .
in one variation of the four-player indian game , the different pieces had different point values , which were scored by capturing the piece , and the king could be captured like the other pieces .
the latent influence by which the values of things are made to conform in the long run to the cost of production is the variation that would otherwise take place in the supply of the commodity .
less than what is known to be best is not honest practice in a matter which involves life , limb , and indefinite degrees of property values .
valuable effects were there daily sold for a twentieth part of their original cost , and the vicomtesse saw her little stores diminish daily ; for the mont de piete was obliged to regulate its own proceedings by the received current values of the day .
the misconception is paying attention only to the " high score " or extreme value , when a continuous distribution of values exists ( what gould calls a " full house " ) and is what actually drives the phenomena .
nevertheless , in 1994 , cnn 's crossfire debated whether the film promoted conservative values or was an indictment of the counterculture movement of the 1960s .
the aef as part of the system call function calls the adf , which uses aci and the rules to return a decision and a set of new aci attribute values .
but let him , at least if he values facts , think twice before he goes on to apply to her that other line which speaks of human hopes defeated and overthrown .
if model output values drastically differ from historical values , it probably means there is an error in the model .
for a charming love story with unusual twists and turns of fate told in an interesting manner with good production values .
even the epicureans , who developed further the hedonistic theory of life , emphasized the values of friendship as among the choicest and most refined sources of pleasure .
and in 1990 , the eighteenth cgpm adopted conventional values for the josephson constant and the von klitzing constant , fixing the conventional josephson constant at exactly 483,597 .
his sense of values was impregnated with what he called his 'espagnolisme ' -- his immense admiration for the noble and the high-sounding in speech or act or character -- an admiration which landed him often enough in hysterics and absurdity .
the constant change of law , the constant fixing of new values in place of old ones , is necessary to social life .
a second round of expansion , along with a few reassigned letter values , occurred in 1932 .
the question of the relations among values is a separate topic , which will be discussed for its own sake later .
in 1983 , the high court defined religion as " a complex of beliefs and practices which point to a set of values and an understanding of the meaning of existence .
calculating this value for various values of n1 , it can be found that at one particular value of optimum refractive index of the layer , the transmittance of both interfaces is equal , and this corresponds to the maximum total transmittance into the glass .
this subordination of all the other values of life to sympathy is achieved only at the expense of the great humanistic virtue -- decorum or a sense of proportion .
the richest ores are found in division iii , where extensive beds several feet in thickness are found containing ore practically free from jasper , and ranging in iron values from thirty per cent to sixty per cent .
it is designed to give students the knowledge , skills , attitudes and values they need to give responsible directions and to make decisions in their own lives .
we are consciously selecting out of life precisely those elements , are centering on those interests , which have eternal significance and are imperishable values .
may i not pass by its great values , and prefer to purchase at a great cost my indolence and dissipation .
my business leads me to appreciate values correctly .
in later life she defended italian values against what she saw as the threat of german expansionism .
but when a master has carried his study of the fading of colors and of their relative values thus far , he must have considered not only the element of color itself , but also the collective tones which color is capable of expressing .
it had various values , from three fourths of a cent in norway to more than two cents in lübeck .
my two photos have , as usual , very different colour values , of which the nordenfalk ones seem the most harmonious , and therefore one imagines the most accurate .
all damage totals are in their respective currency values in 2003 in mele , the tide caused by beni was only measured as high as .
the national reorganization process promoted nationalist values during the dirty war and the falklands war ( ) .
i should say it was worth at least '' -- he paused and then named a sum which startled dunham , even accustomed as he was to counting values in high figures .
a blood inspection of the ewe showed elevated serum enzymes that indicate muscle damage ( ldh , ast and ck values ) .
depending on the function , the remainder may be uniform only for certain values of n , e .
this number comes from the fact there are 12 numbers that are coprime with 26 that are less than 26 ( these are the possible values of a ) .
over the next few years they worked to restore the natural values of the watershed , mostly by planting trees .
the extreme values in summer sometimes slightly are over ( sometimes with very high humidity ) , while in winter , under special and rare conditions drop slightly below zero .
a strong believer that character matters , he instilled a strong sense of purpose and values in every athlete who ever played or wrestled for his teams .
as the values of not all persons are equal ( see my example above ) this would create huge subjectivity .
each variable of this new problem is associated to a set of original variables ; its domain contains tuples of values for the variables in the associated set ; in particular , these are the tuples that satisfy a set of constraints over these variables .
modern education and human values .
in 140 bc hipparchus gave the first tables of chords , analogous to modern tables of sine values , and used them to solve problems in trigonometry and spherical trigonometry .
it is my hope that they will reflect the values and beliefs progressive conservatives hold so strongly " .
as the parameter is increased towards this region , the mapping undergoes bifurcations at precise values of the parameter .
homespun virtues : unselfishness , indifference to money values , the constant sense of filial , fraternal , social responsibility .
mr. hanna is a great stickler for values when contending for mrs. eddy ’ s great generosity .
abf 's mission is also to strengthen democratic values in bosnia and preserve its multiethnic and multicultural character .
dbl the overcaller shows shortness in diamonds , and at least 3 cards in hearts and clubs , with some extra values for the overcall .
if the sensor that is used to produce the range image is properly calibrated the pixel values can be given directly in physical units , such as meters .
rendered in highly idealistic american scene painting values , his works often portray bucolic , idyllic settings such as gardens , streams , stone cottages , lighthouses and main streets .
it is the accuser and antagonist of all the fixed and ancient values and imperatives and prohibitions of the normal social life .
akatemia 's founding fathers perttu pöyhönen , aleksi kumpuniemi and kimi juntunen ( also known as pak ) had a passion for low-level football but found it hard to find a club with suitable values including active training and a team filled with great lads .
these goods have varying values around the caribbean , and will shift in value over time , though most don 't change much at any given time .
his films have thereby continually given us the " quintessential hero acting in defiance of peer group authority and asserting his own code of moral values .
obviously no algebraic solution can be obtained from equations ( 3 ) and ( 4 ) for κ and λ in terms of the computed values β and ϵ , and hence a resort to tables is necessary .
we exiled the people from the soil ; and in the cities , where we piled them , we turned the values , which they created , into an instrument for their ultimate destruction .
if so , that is the problem ; almost any software you install on a windows system sets some values in the windows registry , which do not get copied over if you just drag the files from the old hard disk to the new hard disk .
examples of frequently encountered grammatical categories include tense ( which may take values such as present , past , etc .
for most points on most surfaces , different sections will have different curvatures ; the maximum and minimum values of these are called the principal curvatures .
dr. davenant values the augmentation at 9000 a year .
the single taxer has his formula , the land values tax and no other tax , and all else is heresy .
a cheating player can therefore set these values to anything they like before restoring a saved game .
if he leave that road he will find himself shunned by the people whom he most loves and esteems , and whose approval he most values ... .
this process is repeated for each of the three color values .
she did not know the money values .
the tickets were distributed as presents ; each was a prize , and the prizes were rarities of various kinds , and of different values .
the motto and mission of the university in latin is " rerum cognoscere causas et valorem " ( in english " to learn the causes and values of things .
he says _that_ is all he cares for , and only values his honours as a step to a higher honour and dignity , that of gaining my love and being my husband .
these values are for total blood and not only blood plasma .
in calculating diurnal inequalities for n and w , one ought , strictly speaking , to assign to h and d the exact mean values belonging to these elements for the month or the year being dealt with .
my father and mother neither of them attached much importance to conventions , or to the fictitious values which society puts on clothes or money or position .
zealously admiralty guided their youth on a path that led to a culture and appreciation of values , wide in scope , to serve their profession .
it must be an intent , zealous , busy , operative prayer ; for consider what a huge indecency it is that a man should speak to god for a thing that he values not !
in actual practice , however , we act too often as if we only cared for economic values .
this attack requires more knowledge of how submitted values are later used .
a fourth , although not necessary , function of an in-situ cap should be the " encouragement of habitat values .
an equality of values must somehow be obtained , and it could be obtained in a spirit of general friendship and good-will .
as values were beginning to show a material decrease , about five years ago , an experienced mining engineer of recognized standing was engaged to give advice concerning the future exploitation of the property .
[ 134 ] by means of them , as commodities of a given value , the values of all other commodities are measured .
the long-headed woman values every recess and corner as a possible press .
i 've found that there are quite a few common ways to write these values and symbols that should be easy to replace with the template version automatically .
such graphs are said to have an accuracy within 1-2 percent for z values greater than 0 .
[ 13 ] note. -- these values are correct for effective sinusoidal voltages .
however , this method allows a specially geared and prepared raid group to face bosses with very high health values , making it a valuable tool in the raider 's arsenal .
i considered my parents and their steadfast values , and understood their torment .
on account of this difficulty , the atomic weights published by dalton , and the more accurate ones of berzelius , were not always identical with the values now accepted , but were often simple multiples or submultiples of these .
the differences of nations in relation to the sun 's rays and in character of country , environment , race , colour and structure of mind -- these are primal values , the very values that will sum up into the essential grandeur of the whole .
mah-jongg is another game very similar to rummy that uses a set of tiles with card-like values and art .
[ 514 ] he maintains that the new dynamic credit , credit granted by a banker for a really new enterprise , as yet not concretely in existence , represents something new in the world , anomolous from the angle of static values , and static credit .
in fact , the writer rarely speaks of his work at all , and is more inclined to tell of the mining shares he has accumulated , their present and prospective values .
the civil engineering section dealt wholly with fixed property located entirely within the state ; and the work offered no special difficulties in the way of assignment of values .
i hope i was what we call `` above '' the petty masculine instinct which values a woman who is hard to win chiefly for that circumstance .
the values of both of the waveforms are either multiplied together , or the value of one is subtracted from the other .
she even took a sort of secret joy in the dramatic values which that scene of play-acting presented to her .
self-defense in a legal and moral society are in the main superfluous , and the values of individuals are so changed that to justify them by the duel would seem out of place .
he has worked at the printing business fifteen or sixteen years ; can handle axe , saw , spade , hoe , or other instrument of husbandry as well as most men , and values himself and is valued by others for his skill in cookery . ''
he is very kind-hearted and greatly values all life and friendships .
note that these formulae are well-behaved for all values of the degree and order , except for those with integer values .
file system implementations should check cluster values in cluster-chains against the maximum allowed cluster value calculated by the actual size of the volume and treat higher values as if they were end-of-chain markers as well .
specifying custom sort values is handy , but most editors do not know about that possibility and would find it repetitive .
a decline of values followed the civil war .
our time-sense is so fallible , we do not notice the departures from exactness ; and when the durations of processes are nearly equal and the values which we attach to them are equal , then we are conscious of them as equal .
however , the values of the matrix elements are found through empirical formulae that estimate the degree of overlap of specific atomic orbitals .
analytically , x can also be raised to an irrational power ( for positive values of x ) ; the analytic properties are analogous to when x is raised to rational powers , but the resulting curve is no longer algebraic , and cannot be analyzed via algebraic geometry .
the natives had different values .
the tekke stands out as very important for the architectural values as it presents rare samples of sacral architecture , useful for the analyse of this type of monuments .
yaariyan tells the story of 5 close friends who are in college , experiencing different relationships and learning new values .
the discovery of new values in life is a very chaotic experience ; there is a tremendous amount of jostling and confusion and a momentary feeling of darkness .
jimmy and a celebrity guest take turns rolling large , soft balls up a ramp into the audience , where audience members are holding bins and buckets labeled with different point values in a layout reminiscent of that used in a regular [ [ skee ball ] ] game .
regulation of self-esteem occurs through gratifications related to the age , which include or imply a normal infantile system of values , demands or prohibitions .
lowenstein pointed out that " value investing requires not just patient managers but also patient investors " , since value investing managers have also demonstrated regular drops in portfolio values ( offset by subsequent profits ) .
these values are the results of the partially collective experiences of the deepest in life , and have been gained in the history of the race .
many of the " old line " families have either died off or moved away , while many nouveau riche have moved into the area who do not share the same old-fashioned values and observe the same old-fashioned norms of behavior that the pentlands do .
the tongan average is much higher than any of the fijian values , whereas the solomon islanders show similarity to the fijians in this feature .
but the exchange values of different kinds of thefts bother me most , they are so illogical .
our society has come to see that a strategy to build shareholder value without a clear mission based on robust ethical values , is a complete nonsense .
similarly , the _übermensch_ ( superman ) would no doubt be compelled to live the ascetic life in his strenuous struggle with subsisting values .
in table ii are some data as to winding coils on straight cores to obtain various values of inductance .
hilbert symbol ( α , β ) in the case of odd prime powers , for some special values of α and β when the field is the ( cyclotomic ) extension of the p-adic numbers by a pnth root of unity .
between 2007 and 2010 , these tools were used to map the personal values , current culture values , and the desired cultural values of a statistically valid sample 12 nations and several communities .
rai 's values and lifestyle were influenced by her family , and even as her fame continues to rise , she holds strong to a religious , value-based life , influenced early on by her parents .
balzac subverts conventional social values as social norms are revealed to be a fiction .
the matter is slightly more complicated with super nes games and games for other systems , which store absolute rgb color values .
therefore , if some values are much more likely to be searched than others , it is desirable to place them at the beginning of the list .
of course this feature of the velocity _c_ as a limiting velocity also clearly follows from the equations of the lorentz transformation , for these became meaningless if we choose values of _v_ greater than _c_ .
m. de sismondi , in his `` studies of social economy , '' observes somewhere that , when a banker delivers to a merchant bank-notes in exchange for his values , far from giving credit to the merchant , he receives it , on the contrary , from him .
as the viscosity of these oils increase , the iodine values decrease , and a slight rise in saponification value and specific gravity is observed .
the gradations of the values is in itself instructive . ''
of the readjustment of ideas , the revelation of beauty , the new birth of values , because of the vision of a larger world lying beyond factory , workshop , office , school-room ?
the word is a play on the word " comintern , " the short name of the communist international and was used because it was believed that such homosexuals , being enemies of " traditional " values , were card-carrying communist party usa members as well .
the maha mandapam and the outer mandapam depict the true tradition , architecture and values of chola culture .
central values tend to establish our identity and gain us social approval thereby showing us who we are , and what we stand for .
the will conquers the emotions by means of principles , by clear and distinct knowledge , which sees through and corrects the false values ascribed to things by the excitement of the passions .
the values of the furs were nominal , as they were paid for in goods passed off to the indians for two or three times their actual worth .
the massachusetts state democratic party has honored her for her work on behalf of democratic values .
b 'nai b 'rith perlman camp is a traditional camping experience that encompasses athletics , arts , aquatics , outdoor adventure , and fosters jewish values , morals and ethics .
it is a conjecture that there are infinitely many n values of every integer b which is not a perfect power .
m. sinclair , by indicating the values of these variables through curves and laying down one set of curves over another .
apparently hipparchus later refined his computations , and derived accurate single values that he could use for predictions of solar eclipses .
a risk management information system ( rmis ) is an information system that assists in consolidating property values , claims , policy , and exposure information and provide the tracking and management reporting capabilities to enable the user to monitor and control the overall cost of risk .
scriptn acceptable values are iso 15924 code or unicode script alias .
aprons are the least neutral of garments , for they have the effect of bringing into view certain values in their wearer .
it could n't however be contagious : too great was the limit of her sense of what painters call values .
the values of b´´´ and c´´´ can be followed until they reach the pockets of the men who have contributed their several shares to the making of these things .
if we adopt the mean values given in the last column of table i. , the best coefficient of friction which can be deduced is 0·41 .
by-and-by we shall call attention to an external force called competition , whose mission is to regulate values , and render them more and more proportional to efforts .
) , quantities whose values are sought .
neither are they so precise as to enable us to give any opinion regarding the relative values of several samples where all are genuine .
although he was clear on distancing himself from the african socialism of many of his contemporaries , nkrumah argued that socialism was the system that would best accommodate the changes that capitalism had brought , while still respecting african values .
in practice , investors must substitute predictions based on historical measurements of asset return and volatility for these values in the equations .
contrast the nutritive values of celery , potatoes , and old beans .
she even tried to get up an interest in the unknown quantities , whose values , hamish assured her , were so easily discovered by the rules laid down in the book .
for many , such relationships are ideally built upon values of trust , loyalty , the negotiation of boundaries , and compersion , as well as overcoming jealousy , possessiveness , and the rejection of restrictive cultural standards .
there had been an overstimulation of industrial enterprises ; land values had been artificially inflated in the northwest ; and capital had been too easily raised .
if the specific gravity is below these values , remove a little electrolyte and add same amount of 1.400 specific gravity electrolyte .
no one who values her good health will allow herself to be hurried through a meal , nor will she allow the perplexities of life to be thrust upon her at the table for solution .
these shadows , absolutely indescribable in their delicacy , are the result of a most perfect sense of values and of a technique as sure as it is facile .
the break with the past was a break with its values as these were rooted in literate culture .
he 's lost heavily by some of the recent failures , and there 's been a terrible shrinkage in his values .
several of these values were surcharged between 1908 and 1910 .
-- le maître a été cependant très satisfait du succès de la pièce , dit cosima , -- et surtout des manifestations sympathiques d'amis inconnus , qu'elle lui a values .
this allowed him to control production values and faithfulness to his books .
because of its roots in the british community and more importantly as it was established as a charitable non-profit institution the bnh still values its role as a contributor to the well being of the people of bangkok .
in the actual sounds of many of the hebrew letters lies a singular power , unguessed by the majority , undivined especially , of course , by the mere scholar , but available for the pure in heart who may discover how to use their extraordinary values .
these conditions we have developed sufficiently in the theory of proportionality of values , which we might call as well the theory of the gradual reduction of cost .
recommended world health organisation ( who ) air quality guidelines for europe 2000the following guideline values ( ppm values rounded ) and periods of time-weighted average exposures have been determined in such a way that the carboxyhaemoglobin ( cohb ) level of 2 .
if the x and y values are not on a wall , the method will call itself with all adjacent x and y values , making sure that it did not already use those x and y values before .
( 5 ) the theory has no bearing on the explanation of entrepreneur cost -- money-outlay , `` opportunity cost , '' alternative positive values , or what not .
x " and " y " take the values " brainy " and " sporty " .
they give it its status in the ideal world ; but the appearance of these characters and values here and now is what needs explanation in physics , an explanation which can be furnished , of course , only by the physical concatenation and distribution of causes .
[ 10 ] [ sidenote : their values and training ] the value of the _territorial army_ , therefore , was that of excellent , though in certain cases immature , material , available for training upon the outbreak of war .
october 31 , 1929 ) was a muslim who murdered a book publisher named mahashay rajpal for publishing the book rangila rasul , that supposedly offended religious values of muslims .
he was born into the " nallan chakravarthula " family which is known for its rich musical and literary values and has had produced many renowned musicians and scholars .
fear could snatch away the very values we are striving to defend .
red-rock was not reached but the values increase with depth , as is usually true .
critics and admirers tend to agree that blair 's electoral success was based on his ability to occupy the centre ground and appeal to voters across the political spectrum , to the extent that he has been fundamentally at odds with traditional labour party values .
in his masterpiece , `` the duchess of malfi , '' and in a lesser degree in `` the white devil , '' his recognition of moral values again recalls shakespeare .
each device counts a certain number , in a manner similar to the devices on ordinary playing cards , and the winning is by the high and low or the definite and specific values of the sticks decided upon in variations of the games .
ok so my understanding was that nuclear isospin multiplets all had the same i and different values of i3 .
tonnage values are 544 gross register tonnage , 760 deadweight tonnage , and 212 net register tonnage propulsion is provided by two scotch marine boilers supplying a triple expansion steam engine , which delivers 1,400 ihp to the propeller , for a maximum speed of .
humanitarian sympathy seemed to him to be tending not merely to a subversion , but to an inversion of values , to a positive preference for the trivial and the ignoble .
these are for communities that may share some , but not all of the fec values , or who are not prepared for full membership .
use , skip , go top , go bottom , and go recno ) , manipulate field values ( replace and store ) , and manipulate text strings ( e .
fauvism is the style of les fauves ( french for " the wild beasts " ) , a short-lived and loose group of early twentieth-century modern artists whose works emphasized painterly qualities and strong colour over the representational or realistic values retained by impressionism .
while the rate of rentals as compared with values remained unchanged , there was a resulting general increase in their amounts , and this caused murmuring , but no really serious trouble resulted .
once again , the critics and proponents of enclosure are locked in battle , hurling at each other incommensurable claims about innovation , efficiency , traditional values , the boundaries of the market , the saving of lives , the loss of familiar liberties .
he recognizes the fact that women , gold , gin , and cattle have values that are stable everywhere .
it had all rested on a tissue of deceit and speculation that had no foundation in real values .
but i would have women never forget that it is not for what they may possibly add to the sum of human knowledge that the world values them , primarily .
moreover some notable fakes are in themselves very important because they are very good indicators of cultural values such as the jesus box ( the osary of the brother of jesus i think ) .
themes of her dramas are tied to small town values and the importance of love .
according to the foundation 's mission statement , it is " rooted in the jewish tradition and committed to democratic values and social justice , including fairness , diversity , and community .
the accounts for the fiscal year ending 30th september , 1857 , contain the following item : -- `` rawdon , wright and co. , postage stamps , £165.9.6 '' which must include the cost of dies and plates for the two new values .
he tried to lead the conversation away from so unpleasant a subject , and went on to talk rapidly of the values of different foods , of vegetarianism and vegetarians , and of men who had gone for long periods without any food at all .
whatever attitudes may have been prevalent then , persecuting individuals on the basis of sexual orientation is abhorrent and an affront to the values of our university .
squaring is used in statistics and probability theory in determining the standard deviation of a set of values , or a random variable .
his system , intended to be compatible with typography , is based on a single line , displaying numbers representing intervals between notes and dots and commas indicating rhythmic values .
the crier took his place , while the young men who were looking for wives or the young men 's parents who were to pay for them , stood about watching their opportunity to exchange their money for feminine values .
note the base value should only be magnitudes , while the per-unit values are phasors .
compared with his figures , those in the same chapel by his precursor , masolino , are childish , and those by his follower , filippino , unconvincing and without significance , because without tactile values .
8 lord , in thy laws ( 6 ) direct my ways , ( 6 ) he perseveres -- not since those my watchful foe surveys , that he values the laws , and make me persevere : but because his foes watch him .
connascence of values ( cov ) connascence of values is when several values must change together .
=some of the scientific applications of colour.= -- it associates colour sensations with definite names and values ; discovers and classifies cases of colour-blindness , and is a preparation for the physical study of light .
because faxlore and xeroxlore is the ( mis ) appropriation of technology owned by the employer , much humorous faxlore is mildly subversive of the workplace and its values .
`` mr. chorlton deals clearly and concisely with the whole subject of rating and land values . ''
this would take many years for even modest values of d .
the following example table with a check constraint will prohibit any integer values from being inserted into column i , but will allow null to be inserted since the result of the check will always evaluate to unknown for nulls .
the gravity will take care of that , regardless of its value or set of values . ''
every group and illuminati has some power , resistance and income values ; most of the world groups have an alignment .
the movement seeks to unite people with socialist and communist political views as well as those with patriotic views and orthodox christian values , hoping on this basis to create a spiritual synthesis .
the increasing mocking and criticism of christianity , traditional family values , patriotism , army and military service , and parents ' and teachers ' authority also helped the rural party and the national coalition party to score so big gains in the elections .
if importance values are applied within this project , these only reflect the perceived importance to this project and to the work groups the topic falls under .
niti venpa2 is another venpa style book that preaches values .
the values of most objects are at first fixed for us by instinct or they are suggested by the ethos and mores of our groups -- family , society , national religions , and `` reign under the appearance of habitual self-suggested tendencies . ''
but in the late 19th century , in response to attacks from socialists and debates about how society works , and as a means to escape the conundrums of value theory and to answer how values could become prices , economists developed the theory of marginalism .
her family was a successful banking family with conservative values .
their evaporative values , i.e .
parameters a-d take on values yes or no .
in the case of categorical variables , qca begins by listing and counting all types of cases which occur , where each type of case is defined by its unique combination of values of its independent and dependent variables .
mmd values reveals no evidence of increasing phenetic distance between samples from the first and second halves of this almost 3,000-year-long period .
he studies the relative trade values of different varieties of coffee , and the requirements of his particular clientèle .
a key variable in determining these properties is the principal quantum number n that can be any integer greater than 1 ; the highest values reported for it are around 100 .
has your patriarchal tenderness waxed so faint that you feel no temptation to write your eldest-born a few of those inspiring sentences he so deeply values ?
the comparative values of mineral phosphates , as well as peruvian guano and bone-dust , will be further referred to in the following chapter .
unity is produced by harmonious values and by harmonious color .
[ illustration ] the spotting , or light and dark values , of animals .
since the reflected pulses are unavoidably embedded in electrical noise , their measured values are randomly distributed , so that the transit time must be estimated .
to show that the real root is irrational , you can use the rational roots theorem to show that there are only a few possible values for rational roots , and they happen to all be integers .
the data members , as in structures , need not be primitive values , and in fact may be structures or even other unions .
historic , traditional , and modern take the same values as the direction field , above .
forestry is the science , art , and craft of creating , managing , using , conserving , and repairing forests and associated resources , in a sustainable manner , to meet desired goals , needs , and values for human benefit .
in the best works of the early italians the unity is , in spite of that attention to detail , admirably maintained -- in other words the values are preserved .
base values for the fueling and ignition timing are each retrieved from a three-dimensional map , and certain sensor values are applied as correction factors , for example , to enrich fueling during wide-throttle acceleration or on cold startup .
your whole scale of values has undergone a silent transformation , since you have ceased to fight for your own hand and regard the nearest-at-hand world as the only one that counts .
in the case of the sref ensemble mean , used within the united states , this decreasing usefulness starts with values as low as .
traditional culture and values such as confucianism were challenged .
_purkinje effect._ -- the relative sensibility of the retina varies for different colors with a change in brightness ; or it may be better to state that the relative sensations for various colors alters as the brightness values are reduced to a low intensity .
property values in the townships surrounding the freeway increased 11 .
the clubs motto is " together as one " which reflects the clubs core values on and off the pitch and the clubs diverse backgrounds which all unite under one banner .
they gave me my sense of values and drive to excel .
logic circuits without memory cells or feedback paths are called combinational , their outputs values depend only on the current value of their input values .
other interpretations have been put forward by f. e. peiser ( based on conjectures as to the names on the nineveh sealings ) , c. r. conder ( based largely on cypriote comparisons and phonetic values transferred from these ) and c. j .
the bookstore specializes in books about colombia , scientific magazines , and literature related to colombia and its values .
for , expressing the difference by d , we shall have ∞ - d ± a d. therefore , d + a = ∞ ; consequently , if both were given finite values , an infinite would result from two given finite values , which is absurd .
for example : r. j. wilcox , we take the values of the initials only , 9 1 5 .
interview a friendly tax assessor concerning the difficulties of determining property values .
it was to her an amazing thing that a whole community should so lose its sense of values as to encourage even tacitly what was virtually theft .
it is a book on the law of mutual aid , viewed at as one of the chief factors of evolution -- not on all factors of evolution and their respective values ; and this first book had to be written , before the latter could become possible .
its stability , even at high ph values , makes it an excellent solvent for reactions with strong bases or reactions that require high temperatures .
one can change the model so that instances of the classes represent constant values ( i .
logotherapy _for reflective individuals who are sensitive to values and who are in search of a richer sense of meaning in life._ he who has a _why_ to live for can bear with almost any _how_ .
interior minister daho ould kablia announced the result saying that " the election has reinforced the algerian people 's attachment to the values of peace and stability .
she instead noted the ways that values of the family are different for black women and men , just as the division of labor is also radicalized .
as many skeptics have pointed out , the drake equation can give a very wide range of values , depending on the assumptions .
he had fallen back on his general explanation -- “ we haven ’ t the same values ; ” by which he understood the same measure of importance .
where wilderness values are present , impairment of those values should not be compromised .
spirituality dialogue with an aim of strengthening human values and ethics in business .
one of the enduring influences the star wars saga has had in popular culture is the idea of the fictional jedi values being interpreted as a modern philosophical path or religion , spawning various movements such as the jediism ( religious ) and the jedi census phenomenon .
changes in values and total wealth are gradual .
endowments are policies whose face values equal a benefit amount at a given age , called the endowment age , rather than a death benefit amount .
you should promote the values of capitalism and the free market ; such as competition , individual property and intellectual property .
the biting should proceed in a gradual manner , so that the values are not exaggerated .
the elements of chess opens with a description of the chess board , the various rules of chess , and the relative values of the pieces .
a planet with a high esi ( values in the range from 0 .
h ' is translated to ' 1' and ' l ' is translated to ' 0' ; this function takes an optional second argument xmap , which can be any of the std _ logic values , but defaults to ' 0' .
nor can we directly measure the work done in the living machinery ; but from the effects of pressures and strains , the lifting of heavy weights , driving of root-tips into soil , osmotic phenomena , etc. , it is certain that the values may be very high .
the institution of private property may have had its values in building up civilization ; its utility is over .
cohen says the two films were written and put in front of the cameras in only four weeks " so i had to really , really cut down " in terms of production values .
a press release noted that it served to celebrate the olympic values of excellence , friendship and respect .
titles of works quoted by abbreviated references in this book k. values of certain moneys , weights , and measures occurring in this book .
if these laws confine the appraisal of railway property to its physical elements , the values here submitted would , in the case of prosperous roads , exceed an appraisal for the purpose of taxation .
it appears wherever there are values which depend on future events .
the second column shows the tax at nine mills on the dollar , for values of $ 1 to $ 30 .
tolstoi 's pacificism is the only exception to this rule , for it is profoundly pessimistic as regards all this world 's values , and makes the fear of the lord furnish the moral spur provided elsewhere by the fear of the enemy .
it serves to propagate the hindi language and its cultural heritage and values .
in this sense , an organization that values good customer service may spend more money in training employees than the average organization , or proactively interview customers for feedback .
she was a woman whom no expediency and no custom could ever induce to deal in false values .
objects in their basic form can be used as associative arrays that contain key-value pairs , where keys are strings and values may be any type .
its mission statement emphasises its purpose to enable students to reach their full potential through encouraging achievement , positive values and the desire to learn .
excessive heat warning - extreme heat index ( hi ) values forecast to meet or exceed locally defined warning criteria for at least two days .
capital values often get independent in part of their '' presuppositions , '' as we have seen in the chapter , _supra_ , on `` economic value . ''
this means utf-16 code units are supported , but the file system does not check whether a sequence is valid utf-16 ( it allows any sequence of short values , not restricted to those in the unicode standard ) .
the present millions of the brown fortune of rhode island came largely from the trading activities of nicholas brown and the accretions of which increased population and values have brought .
this new table of values , o my brethren , i set over your heads : become hard . ''
the logical nor is an operation on two logical values , typically the values of two propositions , that produces a value of true if both of its operands are false .
the imperfection and the value of human phenomena are too well understood by them to allow them to place all of the values in the old world , and all of the imperfections in the new .
these tabulations serve only toward a general perspective , the more specific values being in the answers themselves .
he knows what property is for sale , is conversant with values and seems never to make a mistake in his investments .
see our article on [ [ comma-separated values ] ] .
average values for the country are given in the bottom row of the table .
however , in the untyped lambda calculus , there is no way to prevent a function from being applied to truth values , strings , or other non-number objects .
old nimrod , as has been shown , is rather pragmatical in those points of knowledge on which he values himself ; but the squire rarely contradicts him , and is , in fact , one of the most indulgent potentates that ever was henpecked by his ministry .
he may be guilty of little aberrations such as dribbling a football in front of him as he advances with cold steel to the charge , but _au fond_ he has a pretty just sense of values .
fifteen of its 16 colors ( black being the exception ) could be assigned one of 8 luminance values , thus making the ted capable of displaying a far wider array of colors than the vic-ii .
another way to decrease the cost of table resizing is to choose a hash function in such a way that the hashes of most values do not change when the table is resized .
as noted in the previous section , in languages which do not directly support sets but do support associative arrays , sets can be emulated using associative arrays , by using the elements as keys , and using a dummy value as the values , which are ignored .
the most important theorem in relation to partial differential coefficients of orders higher than the first is the theorem that the values of such coefficients do not depend upon the order in which the differentiations are performed .
the argument , that if there be two spade values there might equally well be two values for each of the other suits , almost answers itself .
on 10 june , ngerng was sacked from his job at tan tock seng hospital for " conduct incompatible with the values and standards expected of employees " and for misusing resources for personal pursuits .
it is then redeveloped by a special solution , and the picture in its true values of light and shade thus comes into existence .
crank this wheel and it will drop a number of m & ms equal to the product of the two values into this hopper , here . ''
it gives the real values in one column and tenth parts in another column of each of the benefices in the archdeaconry of lothian .
many books have been written on the various forms and values of advertising .
his two books cover a general study of political economy in revolutionary and early national america , and a partial biography of james madison that , by focusing on his retirement , explores the transmission of republican values across generations in nineteenth-century america .
iase is doing research in fundamental areas of education content , human values , value based science , peace and harmony and technology , consciousness , and human conduct .
their money is called _rupees_ , which are of divers values , the meanest being worth two shillings , and the best about two shillings and nine-pence .
since what he is going to say does not arouse controversy , since no immediate practical interest is ever involved , and there is no question of attacking or defending , but simply of promoting values that are shared in the community .
it is he who has become the new messiah , the focus for an entirely material set of values .
in these cases and in the case of values other than " 1 .
load-frequency control ( lfc ) is a type of integral control that restores the system frequency and power flows to adjacent areas back to their values before a change in load .
to protect the intellectual property rights of grassroots innovators and to generate incentive models for recognizing , respecting and rewarding grassroots creativity and associated ethical values and norms .
these values show an increase of 15 .
the style of the late charles keene is imitated in more than one journal at the present time , the artists catching his method of line more easily than the higher qualities of his art , his _chiaroscuro_ , his sense of values and atmospheric effect .
now the production of all these superfluities absorbs a vast amount of the national labour , and thus diminishes greatly the production of those values which satisfy real wants .
there is no fixed rule as to size of drawing or reduction , but if the designs are drawn for one-third reduction there will be no material alteration in values when produced .
a good trooper values his mount exactly as much as he values himself , and believes , or should believe , that the two together are irresistible where women or men , girl 's or gun 's , are concerned .
the relative values of m and n define the blocking characteristics of the clos network .
nor can the community universal , the `` beloved community , '' be achieved except each local community adjusts its own life to the highest social values .
the series was collected , with remastered color , better paper and production values , and a new framing sequence , as a hardcover published by bruno gmünder verlag .
the plot is usually drawn by evaluating the values of y for high and low values of both x and z , and creating two lines to represent the effect of x on y at the two values of z .
brought up with beta colony 's liberal and anti-militarist values , she despised the military mindset .
i found a number of united states half-dimes circulating at two cent , and dimes at four cent values , and “ collected ” all that came within reach .
argentina may have had fine grazing tracks capable of rearing untold millions of cattle and arable land that had only to be scratched to yield excellent crops of cereals ; but without transport values are at a minimum .
the values are the ½d. , 1d. , 2d. , 2½d. , 3d. , 4d. , 6d. , and 1s .
his early inventions seem to demonstrate a foresight to see the technology curve with business values .
between 1902 and 1957 , measurements by charles greeley abbot and others at various high-altitude sites found values between 1 .
the program gave rise to the establishment of family theater productions , which opened offices in hollywood with the mission of developing christian family values film , radio , television programs and outdoor advertising .
he is very clever in that line. ” in spite of the fact that the supposedly crabbed mistress of hamilton arms mingled little with the business world she had a shrewd practical idea of values .
in the following table we give the values of these factors for three of the types of gyro-compass to be described later .
corporate culture is the total sum of the values , customs , traditions , and meanings that make a company unique .
the ideal has been to deal with the ordinary events of daily life in a manner which will reveal their normal values to the child .
economic process , and personal values , 53-54 .
he would join pilarica who , only a girl though she was , had her values in hours like this .
cohen-almagor maintains that the freedoms the media enjoy in covering events are respected as long as they do not imperil the basic values that underlie democracy .
truth constants are nullary connectives representing particular truth values between 0 and 1 in the standard real-valued semantics .
superior iron and copper , pennsylvania coal and oil , nevada and california gold and silver , all yielded their enormous values to this new call of enterprise .
informally , a superkey is a set of attributes within a table whose values can be used to uniquely identify a tuple .
everywhere that a railroad was built or projected , land was monopolized in anticipation , and the benefit of the improvement was discounted in increased land values .
it creates a method for determining measurement standards for very ambiguous domains of knowledge , such as emotional intelligence , politics , religion , values and culture in general .
however , you have an astounding perception of ethnologic values in merely conceiving the scheme ! ” “ taken by and large , that ’ s nothing but human nature .
and it is truest of all about both the material and higher values of wild life , which we administer as if we were the final spendthrift heirs and not trustees .
technoethical inquiry in the field of education examines how technology impacts the roles and values of education in society .
if draperies are a hindrance to the conveyance of tactile values , they make the perfect rendering of movement next to impossible .
the neo-aristocratic defense of so-called transhistorical and universal human values may also often be linked to a conservative political project .
the `` _if_ '' here saves the principle that all values must be social , and that the social organism is the sole moral reality : yet how near this bubble comes to being pricked !
the ticker does not reel off the changing values .
mobility values are typically presented in table or chart form .
the 32-bit x86 was notoriously register-starved ( it had very few places to store intermediate values ) .
variations include using different colour dots to signify different values , e .
[ e ] there students learn to cook and sew ; they learn a good deal about food values , dietetics and simple food chemistry , simple sanitation , etc .
if i take the meaningless short lines in the figure and arrange them in the given ways , intended to represent the human face , there appear at once notably different aesthetic values .
ld50 values for ionizing radiation exposure .
experience of tone‐harmony in two and three values brings appreciation of no‐tan‐structure and lays a solid foundation for advanced work .
personal values provide an internal reference for what is good , beneficial , important , useful , beautiful , desirable , constructive , etc .
in 1985 , provisional issues were made consisting of 1000 , 5000 and 10,000 peso argentino notes over stamped with the values 1 , 5 and 10 australes .
in terms of process consulting , because of an increase in competition , it becomes important to identify and improve key processes that meet customer values and demands as well as that are faster and cheaper .
others indicated their desire came from moral or social values , which may be independent of their religion .
in this case , the shared values of the gort cloud are a concern for the environment and the desire for more sustainable products and services .
taverns , establishment of , 356 ; titles for , 356 ; prices at , 357 ; values about , 357 ; names of rooms at , 357 ; in southern colonies , 360 ; in new netherland , 361 .
there are numerous species of chinchona , producing bark of greatly different values .
exactly where the boundary is drawn between proper values and data structures masquerading as such is often hard to predict .
but if regulation has restored , on a smaller scale , the whole of the arrangement according to all values of *x* , *y* and *z* , development also can take place completely ( fig .
the greatest gains and values are farthest from being appreciated .
these allow definitions of data to be given in terms of infinite ranges , or unending recursion , but the actual values are only computed when needed .
these began to appear in november , 1882 , and may be found in the one three , six and ten cent values .
among its basic principles are democracy , human and multicultural values , focus on the modern world , comprehensive training , care and attention to students .
that is because religion is what man values most in his life , and he is loath to change observances in which his affections are powerfully engaged .
it appears probable that his values for higher temperatures may be adopted with this reduction , which is further confirmed by the results of reynolds and moorby , and by those of lüdin .
whereas , however , philosophy substitutes these values for the world of experience , religion makes them continuous with the world of experience .
this has opened a whole new avenue for research ranging from finding very distant objects to finding values for cosmological parameters so we can understand the universe better .
they therefore conform with close approximation to a geometric series ; thus -- _wr0 , wr1 , wr2 , wr3_ , etc. , and they bear as register-marks the values of the successive indices , 0 , 1 , 2 , 3 , etc .
inverse transform sampling is simple and efficient for small values of λ , and requires only one uniform random number u per sample .
there is the girl consumed with ambition , who sacrifices all other values in order to attain the goal of her ambition in art or science .
thus only can we have a true scale of standardised culture values for efferent processes ; and from this we can measure the degrees of departure , both in the direction of excess and defect , of each form of work , motor habit ; and even play .
given surroundings , combined with a gift for knowing values of form and colour , if you have the power to spend thousands of guineas on tiger skins , oriental rugs , and other beauties , barrenness is easily transformed .
in 1992 , he launched his company , the creations limited , to promote the artist and crafts industry , encouraging artistic values and creativity .
the indicators of the values of matter are degraded to a sort of cooks and confectioners , on the appearance of the indicators of ideas .
the bottom is a brilliant red , the top a bright blue and the center different values of purple and pale lavender .
although hemenway was raised on new england values and christian fundamentalism , she became curious about other cultures and religions .
as with capacitors , component values and identifiers are not usually marked on the component itself ; if not documented or printed on the pcb , measurement , usually removed from the circuit , is the only way of determining them .
it differs from ordinary histogram equalization in the respect that the adaptive method computes several histograms , each corresponding to a distinct section of the image , and uses them to redistribute the lightness values of the image .
how could damaris be expected to discriminate , to retain her sense of relative values , in the perpetual scrimmage , the unceasing rush ?
many of the tracks on the album are from their debut tons of sobs , as that album 's rock-oriented ethos and low production values made its material ideal for performing live .
certification is done on the basis of planning values and thus offers no guarantee that these values are actually met .
having spent his life as a highly trained economist with marxist convictions and heroic career as a revolutionary , his fall from grace and savage punishment led him to develop an authentic and deeply personal conversion to the values of liberal democracy .
there is an online tool to translate codes to resistance values .
sorites and also the founder and former leader of jurilog ( logical jurisprudence ) , the logic-and-law research group at the csic , which is carrying out an inquiry into nomological concepts and values .
the ikonomatic method of phonetic writing 213–229 thought-writing and sound-writing ; the ikonomatic method explained ; illustrations from egyptian inscriptions ; from the canting arms in heraldry ; from the mexican picture-writing ; values of position and colors ; determinatives and ideograms in aztec mss .
his plays embody the materialistic middle-class values which he champions in his later prose writings , and of all pope 's arrows , `` and has not colley still his lord and whore ?
her personal knowledge of values was nil .
a foot is a combination of syllables , two or three distinguished , after the greek , as long and short , but more truly accented and unaccented , because our syllabic values , unlike the greek , are more accentual than quantitative .
he values everything within him or without him by the standard of this vision , a vision that for him is no function of time , but a part of eternity .
the diagonal entries of are known as the singular values of .
diet standards 134 discusses various foods and their food values , the quantities we need , and their money cost .
in respect of the method by which the german expenditures for reparation purposes should be credited against her total liability , germany proposes that prices and values should be fixed by a commission of experts .
namespacenumber is 0 for the main namespace , -1 for special pages , and other values for other namespaces .
he was the first of the nationalist writers to promote juan manuel de rosas as an archetype of argentine values , which was later shared by most of his contemporaries .
[ 31 ] `` values , positive and relative . ''
since sampling is typically done to determine the characteristics of a whole population , the difference between the sample and population values is considered a sampling error .
by interposing proper light filters and by making separate exposures for each color , negatives giving red , yellow or green , and blue or purple values were made , together with a fourth negative giving neutral tones—black and grays .
by showing the book value of the assets and the values they are expected to realize , the probable deficiency as a result of the liquidation of the estate is readily seen .
i 'm going to do more of those canvases of the moving figure blended with the landscape ; they make a stunning technical problem in vibration as well as in values ; and then the critics shout over them , too .
there may be a change in point values .
the organization 's values then provide a foundation for its marketing messages .
some days when life seems hard and we reach out for values to sustain us or a friend to help us , we find a person who reminds us what it means to be americans .
the cross-over values are : facet vermilion 40 ; vermilion sable 12 ; facet sable 42 .
final demonstration of appearance , suitability , and values .
the thermal effects increase as one passes from primary to tertiary alcohols , the values deduced from propyl and isopropyl alcohols and trimethyl carbinol being : -- primary = 45.08 , secondary = 50.39 , tertiary = 60.98 .
the key values of the charter come from the phrase " free and democratic society " and should be used as the " ultimate standard " for interpretation of section 1 .
the news caused many in the media to point out the hypocrisy in his political image , where he has consistently presented himself as a supporter of traditional values and a conservative world view , but had been participating in an extramarital affair .
also one from henry james ; in the preface to the golden bowl : `` for i have nowhere found vindicated the queer thesis that the right values of interesting prose depend all on withheld tests . ''
this value ( or values close to it ) was accepted by astronomers for the next two thousand years , until the invention of the telescope permitted a more precise estimate of solar parallax .
jean-luc godard and françois truffaut were rebelling against existing cultural values and used cinema as a means of expression simply because it was the most avant-garde medium at the time , " said besson in a 1985 interview in the new york times .
gaza prime minister ismail haniya stated the killing " does not reflect the values , morals , or the religion of the palestinian people .
i read a good many monographs on the pucelle , of various values ; some real contributions to history , others mere second-hand cookings-up of well-known and often-used material .
by adding the numerical values of the birth date either of napoleon or eugénie to the date of the marriage , we get their fatal year of 1870 .
the music on kuntry livin has been described as spinning " rap rhymes about working-class values over hard-rock riffs .
thus , data with lower sequence numbers generally go before those with higher values .
it is usual for the designer to find compression pressure values , knowing the volumes from the equation p_ { 2 } = p_ { 1 } ( v_ { 1 } /v_ { 2 } ) ^ { 1.4 } 1 which is for adiabatic compression of air .
as a person matures , grandiosity gives way to self-esteem , and the idealization of the parent becomes the framework for core values .
belarus president aleksandr lukashenko has stated that dictatorship in his country is impossible , adding that he personally does not accept liberal values imposed by the west .
they wrote , " for them , the enriching values of reading are denied unless materials reflecting adult interests are adapted to their needs .
when f is a set of non-linear combination of the variables x , an interval propagation could be performed in order to compute intervals which contain all consistent values for the variables .
analysis of practical application of hymns there are two values in the singing of hymns that must needs be taken into consideration : one is the sheerly musical or nervous value ; the other is the message or burden of the hymn .
the scale on the calibration tube reads direct and shows various values of current at which the relay may be set to operate .
thus , computing the amount of the “ loss ” hinges upon determination of “ fair market values , ” and , unfortunately , there is no exact mathematical formula by which this can be ascertained .
sometimes statisticians try to estimate the average " service lives " of fixed assets as a basis for calculating depreciation and scrap values , based on the observed length of time that fixed assets are actually held and used by their owners who own the business .
but how prevail with him ? -- ambition ? -- no ; the world is dead in him , and gold is trash to one , who neither needs , nor values it .
edgewood 's mission is to educate the whole student for a life of learning , service and personal responsibility through a rigorous academic curriculum embracing the sinsinawa dominican values of truth , compassion , justice , partnership and community .
for a whole book he has been insisting on the prime values of imagination and feeling in religion and now he concludes with a plea for the thinker .
this enemy is merciless , believes in extreme religious values and will do anything do destroy the west .
every normal cyclical slump in property values or regional economic shock - e.g. , a plunge in commodity prices - affected them disproportionately .
from the results , as plotted in figure 457 , it is seen that there is a tendency to keep the ceilings within a close range of values .
the computational difficulty of the network synthesis method was addressed by tabulating the component values of a prototype filter and then scaling the frequency and impedance and transforming the bandform to those actually required .
the original tms32010 and its subsequent variants is an example of a cpu with a modified harvard architecture , which features separate address spaces for instruction and data memory but the ability to read data values from instruction memory .
he warned against authoritarian corporatism , fascism , and marxism , calling for an " autonomist christian solidarism " , based on communitarian values .
dakota traditions and cultural values .
they had three times refused to accept a bill for the re-assessment of the land of the province with a view to the imposition of a tax on unimproved values .
and a distinction is to be made , not between monopoly and competitive business , but `` between wealth which is the fruit of productive enterprise and industry or of individual skill , and wealth which represents the capture by individuals of socially created values .
her final novel , between the acts , published posthumously in july 1941 , is steeped in references to rodmell and the traditions and values of its villagers .
as each of these conditions includes within certain limits all possible values and exhibits all possible combinations , it follows that , according to the rules of probability , there must be a mean value , about which the larger and smaller deviations are distributed .
jane hunter was meeting with a new sense of values ; tom beck had sensed a faint recklessness , a despair , about her and , behind all his mockery and lightness , was a warm heart .
fellow-creators the creator seeketh -- those who grave new values on new tables .
`` my knowledge of values is rather musty .
since normal values for the physiological parameters are different for different age categories , the ipi algorithm differs for different age groups ( three pediatric age groups and adult ) .
a series of observations of the voltage between the terminals of one of the phases , is made for different values of the field current .
though he may be so clever as to succeed in reproducing the actual values of the original , which he rarely does , he has still entirely altered the original appearance of the work .
704 were money nothing but a measure of values in exchange , it should on that account , if on no other , have value in exchange itself , as a measure of length must necessarily have length itself .
this does not conform with facts at all , and it can hardly be explained by supposing that a relatively small stock of but three values was operated upon in 1857 and the improvement then dropped for a couple of years .
aricns and similar values in all modern astronomical references .
they have an art-class in which the first thing insisted on is that the pupils should know the price of all the leading modern pictures that have been sold during the last twenty years at christie ’ s , and the fluctuations in their values .
these are the new normalized values .
when used as a count noun " a culture " , is the set of customs , traditions and values of a society or community , such as an ethnic group or nation .
the transition from mediaeval housekeeping , with its use values and private exchange , to the mercantile society of modern times , was not made in a day , nor went on everywhere at the same rate .
this aesthetic value , depending upon the unchanging processes of perception and empathy , asserts itself in answer to every act of contemplative attention , and is as enduring and intrinsic as the other values are apt to be momentary and relative .
he also noted that these were opinions based on his personal values , not issues he would or could deal with as a member of congress .
the values for species of a given family have been linked by a horizontal line .
unicode values 2032 and 2033 ( hex ) or 8242 and 8243 ( decimal ) .
the treaty lays down new principles and responsibilities in the field of the common foreign and security policy , with the emphasis on projecting the eu 's values to the outside world , protecting its interests and reforming its modes of action .
it is well known that these touch values were destroyed by the neo-classicists when they polished the surfaces of their statues .
trade values of fertilizing ingredients in raw materials and chemicals for 1904 : cents per lb .
the ephemerides continued on this basis through 1983 ( with some changes due to adoption of improved values of astronomical constants ) , after which , for 1984 onwards , they adopted the jpl ephemerides .
its subject is the values of goods in commerce , and the nature of coin .
fienberg said " the transition to the small screen has been as smooth as one could hope , particularly in terms of the inevitably diminished production values .
closer uniformity of values in all markets through the development of the telegraph system 72 3 .
this historical example illustrates clearly how phenotype values and gene effects are linked .
for the example provided , the logic for the generate ( g ) and propagate ( p ) values are given below .
he supposes a spherical atom formed of concentric layers of positive and negative electricity disposed in such a way that its external action is null , and that , nevertheless , the force emanated from the centre may be repellent for certain values when the electron is within it .
the values of the functions fn need not be real numbers , but may be in any topological space , in order that the concept of pointwise convergence make sense .
so long as you refuse to alter your old values you ca n't expect the kids to alter their old values .
concrete values can not take the place of the symbol ; only new and more efficient symbols can be substituted for those that are antiquated and outworn , such as have lost their efficacy through the progress of intellectual analysis and understanding .
net , so they will be released as soon as there are no variables containing their values .
a method of pronouncing latin and greek in which the vowels have their more familiar continental values , as in german and italian , the consonants being pronounced mostly as in english .
this must be true , since in the second method the numerical values of the numerals depend entirely on their position -- that is , on their distance above the bottom or first term .
but why should one admire colour more than values ?
and close values , you remember , are the most subtle of relations of light and shade and color .
his work in z-score based neurofeedback has revolutionized the industry by providing practitioners with a method whereby they may see instantaneous responses of the efficacy of their neurofeedback training protocol and automatically assess which values are outside of their respective normative value .
`` [ 53 ] in this setting , also , the experience of suffering produces a shifting of values from the extrinsic to the internal .
both al-adli and as-suli provided estimation of piece values in their books on shatranj .
the differing values of synonyms should be examined ; and if possible something of the history of the words given .
he combined small town values with progressive policies to lead the province through the economic boom of the 1950s .
these algorithms run online and repeatedly determine values for decision variables , such as choke openings in a process plant , by iteratively solving a mathematical optimization problem including constraints and a model of the system to be controlled .
seldm produces a population of storm-event and annual values to address the questions about the potential frequency , magnitude , and duration of water-quality excursions .
advocating in favour of human rights and european democratic values and principles , kučan , his party and slovenia faced increasingly severe political confrontations with belgrade and serbia .
the goal of the jrotc is to teach its cadets to appreciate the ethical values that underlie good citizenship , to develop leadership potential , and to learn to live and work cooperatively with others .
how do you demonstrate values in floor coverings ? _ _4 .
the attempt at absolute values was not made at all before manet's time .
the requisite speed of the film _v ' _ to eliminate distortion is given by the relation : _v ' _ _f_ ———— = ——— _v_ _a_ for the values of _v_ , _f_ , and _a_ used above , _v ' _ = .92 centimeters per second .
it is impracticable to present colored illustrations in this résumé and values expressed in numbers are meaningless to most persons , so a few general remarks will be made in closing the discussion of low visibility as viewed from above in spring , summer and fall .
any two nodes are conditionally independent given the values of their parents .
dr. rashdall , however , conceives of but two alternatives in estimating moral values , the first of which he dismisses , because on this view `` our moral judgments could possess no objective validity . ''
aids among adolescents , as well as the number of unwanted pregnancies and abortions , and add to the conflict between contemporary social values .
now , from equation ( ) it can be seen that only real values for the slope exist if f ( η ) is positive .
[ 75 ] here follows a table , shewing that , in _aries_ , the value of _saturn_ is 5 , of _jupiter_ 5 , & c. ; with the values of the planets in all the other signs .
the second movement " limits quite severely the values of many domains , " for example featuring " only two durational values ( quarter and half note [ s ] ) , " and , partly as a result , " features great uniformity in texture and gesture " .
hals chose to view his subject in a diffused light that permitted practically no shadows , but reduced the whole to a tissue of more light and less light , of higher and lower values .
the power factor , as will be shown later , is equal to _the cosine of the angle of phase difference_ ; its range then is from one to zero because these are the limiting values of the cosine of an angle ( neglecting the + or-sign ) .
but , although details are complex , the social conscience is working toward this general principle : the community should share in the values which it produces .
as housing values rise and fewer vacancies exist , the displacement of existing residents , especially low income residents , begins to happen .
the richest man in this country to-day , if you read the real-estate values , has never moved away from a town of 3,500 inhabitants .
at an abstract level , a file is generally a sequence of bits ( 0 or 1 values ) , usually organized in bytes ( 8 bits together ) .
in the context of diversity , q is generally limited to non-negative values .
there are no countries with whom the people of the united states are so likely to develop sympathy and a sense of common values and common interests as with these three , unless it be with the scandinavian peoples .
those are the same values that led her to public service and continue to guide her decisions as she represents the people of north dakota .
the values of the fgs can then be extracted and used for posterior small-signal simulations , connecting a voltage supply with the initial fg value to the floating gate using a very-high-value inductor .
using the nearest rank method on lists with fewer than 100 values can result in the same number being used for more than one percentile .
high hand and low hand ( using the ace-to-five low values ) split the pot .
`` a temporary unfaithfulness , a yielding to sudden temptation '' she could understand , but a determined plan of duplicity shattered her whole scheme of values .
these are the values used for numerical examples in later sections .
when conflicts arise the arguments oftern centre on the scenic and heritage values of a landscapes .
on the other hand , it is coming to be seen that the construction of a theory of aesthetic values must be assisted by a much more precise examination than aestheticists are commonly content to make , of works of art .
the preface to turbervile 's _tragical tales_ throws some light on the author 's idea of the comparative values of translations .
as a traditional green party , the three core values of agalev were ecology , peace and participatory democracy .
these remaining parts have recently been transferred to department of conservation management , primarily because of the high heritage values of the matukuturua stonefields gardens .
wikipedia and as member of this community i feel strongly about defending its values .
the forum wants to inform about the cdc , its values and goals among a broader public .
here is the table of the values : `` 10 rin make 1 sen , equal to 1 cent .
the club emphasizes mastery of boat-handling skills and values sculling as the principal path to excellence in all types of rowing .
the square root of a positive number has two values .
analog signals vary over an infinite number of possible values which means that electronic noise and interference becomes reproduced by the receiver .
the story is one over which the south has wept tears of agony , at whose recital the civilized world revolted , and which , in years to come , will mantle with shame the cheek of every american citizen who values the good name of his country .
the operands on the belt are read-only ; new results do not overwrite previous values .
kleene 's ) , which accept the values " true " , " false " , and " unknown " , finite-valued with more than three values , and the infinite-valued ( e .
in those values since the taking of the census of 1880 .
pence 's release announcing his run for minority leader focused on a " return to the values " of the 1994 republican revolution .
if you are saving the data as a bunch of values separated by commas , the .
jesus christ is offering to take you into business with him and let you deal with values so much finer and higher than anything else that the surprise and joy of them will last through all eternity .
the purpose of this book was to determine , as closely as possible , the real values , whatever those might be , of the work actually accomplished by the overseas y , and to lay the plain truth without bias or color , before the american people .
it is culturally very rich and it has its own traditions and values that are quite different from the other villages in the area .
these figures should be largely increased to give them their modern values ; but , economise as she might , she found that she could only just manage to rub along .
parker and which held strong institutional values and views within its ranks .
a system of a large number of particles is characterized by the mean values of a relatively few number of macroscopic quantities such as temperature , energy , and density .
incarnation school is a parochial elementary school that exists to provide an education of excellence grounded in the truths and values taught by jesus christ and the catholic church to our community of students , while recognizing the unique gifts of each child .
cigar values .
it is clear that there may be charges of different values as well as of either kind .
general john de chastelain was a recipient of the vimy award , which recognizes a canadian who has made a significant and outstanding contribution to the defence and security of our nation and the preservation of our democratic values .
if one shares values that transcend culture , then it is easier to get married across cultures .
l , which , plugging in the above values , comes to about 0 .
these factors include cultural heritage , shared values , practices , and prevalent social cueing and reception thereof , including expression of emotions , gestures , body language , and facial expressions .
away from the market-place and from fame taketh place all that is great : away from the market-place and from fame have ever dwelt the devisers of new values .
what of the values of instrumental goods , of goods of `` higher orders , '' of labor , of stocks and bonds , of lands , of franchise rights and good will ?
it is difficult , however , to comprehend what the figures i have given , showing the amounts and values of kansas products , really represent .
he has looked on death at close quarters , and , whatever his intelligence may be -- whether he be gutter-snipe or ’ varsity man , sage or fool -- he has a clearer realisation of the ultimate values of things .
`` surely the lord values the workers as well as his work , and we who want our work to prosper can not afford to ignore the interests of those upon whom we depend so largely for success . ''
the film opposes the " easy " money of gold-digging with the wealth and values created by hard work , as the gold rush eventually destroys suter 's fortunes and creates social disintegration and the loss of solidarity and companionship .
the article advanced wen 's " peace doctrine " in global affairs , as well as what appeared to be inclinations towards fostering social democracy and advocacy of universal values .
in the comparison of masterpieces and the measurement of values by accepted standards , she was at ease in a large activity .
before the wonderful progress in the development of industry from the commencement of the nineteenth century , we have seen the changes occurring at different periods , in the relative production of the precious metals , without any corresponding alteration in their relative values .
this is because the cse is driven by their dominant self-transcendent ( concerned with the welfare of others ) as opposed to their self-enhancement personal values .
this also offers the counterpart an opportunity for input wherein they can discuss values , weights , interests , etc .
the 16 standards of faith community nursing practice reflect the specialty 's professional values and priorities and provide practice directions and the framework for practice evaluation .
republican political strategy to reassert the authority of the white race and promote american anglo-saxon values .
a continuous function on [ 0,1 ] is determined by its values at the rational points , so the cardinality of c ( [ 0,1 ] , r ) is c .
for in the long run _all_ values in germany , including the yield of taxation , will tend to adjust themselves to an appreciation or depreciation in the value of the paper mark outside germany .
as an example , in 1992 the programme started using the restrictive guideline values in the eec bathing water directive as imperative criteria , and this was also the year where all blue flag criteria became the same in all participating countries .
for parameters with multiple values , use ( displays one per line ) or ( displays on one line ) .
four seemingly synonymous values are assigned to the measurement of composure .
the experiments on solids lead to certain laws of elasticity expressed in terms of coefficients , the values of which can be determined only by experiments on each particular substance .
for absolute linearity the end points of the straight line are defined by the ideal upper and lower range values for the device , rather than the actual values .
v , 15 , represents the boat , whose phonetic values are given above , with a flower=ankh , the homonym of life , containing the names an and na , from which the uræus=ara , is rising .
g. holland._ =the christian religion is especially remarkable , as it so decidedly lays claim to mere goodwill in man , to his essential temper , and values this independently of all culture and manifestation .
since the values of all commodities constitute the only true standard of value , as close an approximation to this standard as possible should be adopted as our standard of value .
mit lincoln laboratory is also committed to diversity and inclusion in the workforce as core values .
this is an array of values that represent pixel color values on the screen .
weight relative classification classifications per 30 ounces values dozen per per case dozen dozen southern iowa 's purebred flocks of 45 lbs .
in contrast to elkies ' method , this involves non-zero values of the variables .
this steady increase naturally leads to speculation in which future increase is anticipated , and land values are carried beyond the point at which , under the existing conditions of production , their accustomed returns would be left to labor and capital .
how beautiful it is to give to stone , through nothing but the values of planes , through the handling of shadow and light , the same charm of color as that of living nature , of the flesh of a woman .
the man who can buy anything he covets , without any consultation with his banker , values nothing that he buys .
the modulus should , however , be large so as to obtain the largest universe of checksum values .
the continued fraction representation expresses the real number values , both rational and irrational , of the sine function .
it is something instinctive with us , something we were born with and we see shades and harmonies and values that other people do not .
reliability data require that values be pairable , i .
some headings and values can be overridden if the titles of the articles in question are not of the format " x of region " .
these goods will be accounted for at fair values .
in addition , the value of is ambiguous , since and gives different values for .
these values were denominated in irish pounds in 2001 , and in euros in 2002 , after the euro changeover .
[ 68 ] michael , donald n. , `` space exploration and the values of man , '' space journal , september 1959 , p. 15 .
in 1540 king john of portugal , had pedro mascarenhas , portuguese ambassador to the vatican , request jesuit missionaries to spread the faith in his new indian possessions , where the king believed that christian values were eroding among the portuguese .
my friend told me i can edit the cpu timings to certain values that cpuid gives me to get it up to 1600mhz , but i tried to look in my bios and i can 't seem to edit memory timings there .
almost reluctantly the anæsthesia of unreality and distorted values was disappearing , leaving steve with but one conclusion : that it had been his own conceited fault , and therefore he deserved scant pity from either himself or the world at large .
many african cultures do not value the same things as we do in the west and its a mistake consider the disinclination of indigenous africans to embrace western values , social or political structures as an inferiority , instead of a cultural difference .
as new interest arises in the open country and as additional values accrue , persons will remain in the country or will return to it ; and the labor will remain or return with the rest .
as an institution of higher learning that promotes and inculcates ethical standards , values and norms , east west university ( ewu ) is committed to the ideals of equal opportunity , transparency , and non-discrimination .
art , like beauty , should `` enclose the world of values in the world of forms . ''
the nameplate limitations are good to follow but on major brand units these values are rated based on full output and high heat .
the marine park was declared on 26 february 1999 under the marine parks act 1997 , with a zoning plan commencing on 1 december 2004 to protect the important natural and cultural values of the park while providing a range of sustainable uses .
not a man who tends to take justice into his own hands ; who aims to keep his reputation in society high , and who values this aim more than his own life .
n integer total number of words in all documents ; sum of all n _ d values , i .
complete immersion in a foreign culture necessitates an ability to adapt to the norms of a different society with different customs and values , usually also a different language .
the second group comprises tables of values which are found experimentally , e.g .
the american companies formerly yielded to the pressure of a mistaken public sentiment , and competed for favour by promising excessive values in case of surrender .
the results were extremely gratifying , for during the winter ’ s visit traces were uncovered of those eternal values of native language and tradition , which happily were still preserved in the memory of françois neptune ( pl .
are not religions , rationally compared , of different values ?
: true-hacker : [ analogy with ` trufan ' from sf fandom ] n. one who exemplifies the primary values of hacker culture , esp .
in the end we are left to invent the story for ourselves -- not indeed without sufficient guidance towards the truth of things , since the successive speeches are a discipline in distinguishing the several values of human testimony .
galton shows that this law applies to social relations and mental values as well as to the stature of the body .
a 2003 review recognized the " powerful singing voices " and " dance that delivers the goose bumps " , but said that " the production values are reminiscent of an elementary-school pageant , rickety scenery and all " .
so obviously indefensible are these valuations that i would hesitate to accuse the _britannica ’ s_ editors of deliberate falsification—that is , of purposely distorting æsthetic values for the benefit of english artists .
the result is that the play-festival has two high values , the social and the educational .
religion is attacked in " god made the virus " , while the return of victorian values espoused by margaret thatcher are compared to medieval oppression in " in the dark times " .
at that time , the foundation was charged with the development and support of innovative educational programs and services that reflected the values and educational tradition of barat college .
sounds like they are different formats for encoding signed values using binary symbols .
the complete realisation of exchange values or the social labour that is performed depends , as is seen , on the adaptation of supply to demand , and is a matter of organisation , of social direction .
are you sure they were not the values i gave to you myself ?
there is a marginal equilibrium between its values in the two employments .
between 1948 and 1964 , although under the initial stages of the communist regime , the theatre remarkably managed to keep true to its artistic values .
the poet moulds that which appears evanescent and ephemeral in image and in mood into everlasting values .
experience has shown that the straight‐line design and the flat black ink wash are most satisfactory for earlier exercises in two values .
from nietzsche , they inherited the desire for a complete overturn of all values accepted by bourgeois societypolitical , moral , and cultural .
to foster values , behaviours and a lifestyle towards a sustainable future .
protestant values and interests while disregarding those of workers , indigents , and immigrants .
[ 30 ] what , then , are the particular values that the graphic arts determine or accentuate ?
now , if you want a still greater contrast , place an egyptian granite sculpture inside a building like le petit trianon , and this intimate association between the art and the values of a people will begin to seem clear to you .
both schools bring several shared values to the new school system including a religious grounding in the roman catholic faith tradition as taught and supported by the congregation of saint basil and the sisters of saint joseph .
asset values fall ( real estate ) ; sales transactions fall ( postponed purchases ) ; and once the monetary authorities have slashed interest rates to zero , there 's nowhere to go .
if x be a symbol to which different numerical values can be assigned , such expressions as x2 , 3x , log .
it should be remembered that monetary values in italy are entirely different from those in america .
but he had besides a keen sense of artistic values .
however , it is homogeneous of degree 1 , and so it defines a 1-form with values in the line bundle o ( 1 ) , which is the dual of the fibrewise tautological line bundle of m .
these transmission loss values are then plotted on a sound pressure level graph and the resulting curve is compared to a standard reference contour .
auxiliary charts were also made showing for each station the following values of q : 1st .
this angered many of the owners of the original 300 cars and almost certainly impacted residual values .
in these spanish-american countries a man who values his life never awaits a second invitation of this sort , and the boston gentleman , with his family , took the next steamer .
the film addresses themes of pregnancy out of wedlock and adultery and also examines the contrasts between the middle and lower classes and poverty with the uneven distribution of wealth and modernity , and struggles in values between past and present in senegal .
to achieve this , the learning algorithm is presented some training examples that demonstrate the intended relation of input and output values .
after the principle of three values has been demonstrated , and the student can appreciate definite intervals of tone , the instructor should allow great freedom in execution , not even limiting to three notes but adding one or two others if necessary to good expression .
in 1910 land values on prairie avenue between twenty-sixth and twenty-eighth streets were $ 250 a front foot ; and from twenty-ninth to thirtieth streets , $ 200 ; on indiana avenue between twenty-sixth and twenty-eighth streets , $ 200 , and between twenty-ninth and thirtieth streets $ 175 .
in the experimental group , contrasting colors were used to notate the different rhythmic values .
to locate extreme values is the basic objective of optimization .
`` _ it is true that from the beginning of history there has existed a ruling scale of values determining the acts of humanity .
additionally , the philosophies of biology , psychology , and the social sciences explore whether the scientific studies of human nature can achieve objectivity or are inevitably shaped by values and social relations .
new called new provinces " an anthology that has between its covers the most famous enactment of modernist values in canada .
critics have made allegations of scientific , theological , and historical errors , claims of contradictions in the quran and criticisms of the quran 's moral values .
farmers care as little for the social values as for land values .
what an idle contradiction that moore and arthur should try to adduce proofs of the supremacy of ideal values in the universe !
the following parameters need to be considered and their values carefully chosen for a successful implementation of this methodology .
and from then to the end of his life that group will in large measure offer him the criteria of values , and his self-esteem will , in the majority of cases , rest upon his idea of their esteem of him .
both spray applications and tree injections have great diagnostic values , because a response to them , if needed is relatively quick .
values in brackets are percentage of the annual values .
they maintained a major pilgrimage and commercial center at cholula , puebla which the spaniards compared to both rome and mecca because the cult of the god united its constituents through a field of common social , political , and religious values without dominating them militarily .
established a lead of 5,245 points in october 2010 , a record since the point values were doubled in 2009 .
from these values , proceeding as in the former cases , we find alignment .
but beyond all these honors he values the esteem of the men under him , and the good will of his competitors .
the future of marriage the transvaluation of values that is now in progress will go on slowly and for a very long while .
the advantages of double skin facades over conventional single skin facades is not clear-cut ; similar insulative values may be obtained using conventional high performance , low-e windows .
it 's a girl 's right , not her lover 's , to say what she values most and how much she is willing to bear .
in fact , he introduces two ideas that were new to current theory , namely , the idea of nationality as contrasted with that of cosmopolitanism , and the idea of productive power as contrasted with that of exchange values .
[ sidenote : _enuf sed_ ] it is not necessary to know accurately the caloric values .
while tabular output can be valuable for identifying specific values , the most common way to present vpp output is with a polar plot .
the united synagogue 's values stem from the principles of both torah and halacha .
a discrete-time lti system is causal if the current value of the output depends on only the current value and past values of the input .
religious democracy is a form of government where the values of a particular religion affect laws and rules .
when you have , as you generally will have , still-life accessories to your flowers , rub in quickly the color and values of the vase or what not first , but leave the painting of it till the flowers are done .
the greater part of philip 's short life had been spent , as the reader knows , in imbibing the principle that a man not only may , but , if he values his soul , must , be rude to women upon all occasions .
he praised traditional values , saying , " there can be no doubt that there is more happiness to be found for man in the simple and contented life of the african than in all the inventions and contrivances of europe .
a master of values , cézanne .
chairs , tables , and case goods have concealed values the points of concealed value in chair and table construction include , among others : 1 .
following is a table of the approximate values of the two relaxation time constants for nonpathological human tissues , just for simple reference .
he must have possessed a certain inborn sagacity , which , however , was not nurtured by a wise bringing up or such an experience of the world as would have enabled him to gain an insight into real values , notably in the selection of high-class character .
in the former , colour values and perspective can only be expressed by thick and thin lines at varying distances apart , the ink on the prints being of the same density throughout , no matter how thick or thin the lines may be .
if quantities are known in microfarads and are to be used in calculations in which the values of the capacity require to be farads , care should be taken to introduce the proper corrective factor .
it also fosters a learning environment which reinforces the concepts of self discipline human values and the acceptance of personal responsibility .
participants learn basic basketball skills , as well as the ymca 's core values .
halutz stated that he made the decision " based on deep-rooted values , those of strong ethics , loyalty to the organization and integrity .
in like manner original values of all kinds are equally constant quantities and anyone from among them might be taken as unity .
by multiplying exchanges , they will level off values and prices .
conditional equations are true for only some values of the involved variables , e .
as the boom had fed upon itself , carrying prices to heights justifiable only to the most insane optimism , so did the subsequent depression bear down upon values until they reached depths justifiable only to the most abandoned despondency .
those who frequent this place are generally of opinion that they know all that is to be known ; they talk much of form and colour , of values and order .
the last day 's work brought to light twenty massive silver ingots , and the whole amount recovered was somewhat over three hundred thousand pounds , a sum equal in the values of our time to five millions of dollars .
generally , values in the range of around 10 to 45 suggest environmental conditions favorable for supercell development .
the functional model defines the meaning of operations and how values are changed due to interactions in the system .
_camilla_ is one of the greatest beauties in the _british_ nation , and yet values her self more upon being the _virago_ of one party , than upon being the toast of both .
from dickinson , biala learned to focus on the essential elements of a subject , to see these elements as abstract forms on the two-dimensional plane of the canvas , and to select the color values that would become the key to the finished work .
a constructed vision of reality so naturalized that it appears to be the only vision of reality learned , fundamental , deep-founded , unconscious beliefs , and values , taken as self-evident universals , that inform an agent 's actions and thoughts within a particular field , e .
new slovenia has taken a staunchly christian conservative position on some issues , advocating traditional social values and defending the position of the catholic church on moral questions .
the organization works in accordance to iap2 's ( international association for public participation ) seven core values for the practice of public participation .
from the attitude commonly taken on the question of literary values , it is clear that the primary significance of expression in writing is often lost .
adventist education prepares people for useful and joy-filled lives , fostering friendships with god , whole-person development , bible-based values , and selfless service in accordance with the seventh-day adventist mission to the world .
these “ values , ” to which every historical act in its singularity has to be related in order to become an element of real history , are they after all nothing but those groups of the products of civilisation which in fact absorb the interest of men ?
instills the values of discipline , teamwork , camaraderie , unity , solidarity , competitiveness and fair play as vital ingredients in building an alert and healthy youth citizenry ; 5 .
as an illustration let us find the values of λ and κ for ϵ = 0.112 and β = 0.044 .
state ownership , taxation of land values , peasant proprietorship , co-operative agriculture -- all have their advocates to-day , but to winstanley 's question whether the earth was made `` for to give ease to a few or health to all , '' only one answer is returned .
however much money may have been lost , or rather , however fictitious values may have been wiped out in the market , the great enterprises are after all increasing the productive capacity of the nation and its industrial strength in the fight with other peoples .
for example , the collatz conjecture has been verified for start values up to about 2 .
for twenty years farm values have been rising steadily , with two evident results : intensive farming and speculation .
stocks at the best only represented nominal values and were given as premiums to the bondholders or promoters of the road .
his adjustment of values even then was mature and firm .
for he was a business man , and gold was far weightier in the scale of values than human flesh , and much less easily obtained .
the length of this line is proportional to the degree to which the index values for the species concerned resemble one another .
the english export houses lost from l5,000,000 to l6,000,000 sterling ; values fell from maximum to minimum .
but , secondly , there really is , in one respect , a closer connection between the value of money and its quantity than between the values of other things and their quantity .
new values and colors appeared periodically through 1885 .
its stated mission is to " cover international current events from a french perspective and to convey french values throughout the world .
and if this can not be maintained is it not hazardous to assume that such general problems of economic theory as the determination of market values or of the shares in distribution require no recognition of the other empirical types of interest ?
precipitation includes rain and melted snow or sleet in inches ; median values are provided for precipitation and snowfall because mean averages may be misleading .
during his time at theological college , preedy had become keen on the concept of using sport to engender moral values , an idea much in vogue at the time and known as muscular christianity .
standards are imposed from above in the sense that people who have the ability and leisure to cultivate their sense of values will , if they take advantage of their opportunities , inevitably influence those less favourably placed .
often the advertisement specified the kind of goods that would be taken and the different values at which they would be received .
she becomes bobby 's stepmother in 2007 and values him as her own child ; increasingly so following an emergency hysterectomy .
however , mulzer and rote remark that the problem is np-complete if the edge weights are rounded to integer values .
however , if this were true it would offer no discouragement , because absolute values play a small part in life .
createsql ( " sql statement " , [ bind values ] ) ; you can also choose to omit the values for the bind variables and supply those values later .
the kaoss pad can also be used to modify volume and pan as well as being able to assign the x or y values to any of the parameters that can be modified elsewhere .
relation of land values in your county to the character of the roads .
mujahid students movement ( msm ) the students wing mujahid students movement ( msm ) formed in 1973 as a part of the attempt to organize all muslim students under the renaissance activities and promoting them to gain high quality education keeping the islamic values .
christmas eve , new year and the arrival of the kings magi ; they are lives that coincide and must unite to rescue family christmas values .
the bohemians , like all other people , have prejudices that make it difficult for them to see clearly values not measured by their own standard , but there can be no question but that their standard measures up well with any people in europe .
the other possibility , since a regular sequence of values is required , is to use a recurrence formula to compute the trigonometric values on the fly .
the why explanations thus typically presented the fact of life in social groups ( which appeared to be unique to humans ) as being largely a result of human ideas and values .
for wave lengths up to 2,200 meters _bank litz-wound coils_ are used and these are wound up in 2 , 4 and 6 banks in order to give the proper degree of coupling and inductance values .
they are infantile in appreciation of values , which , however , they may later learn .
your commissioners further recommend that the same authority be empowered to issue paper money in proportions of 165 % to the gold reserve , the right to give high values to pieces of paper having proved in the past of the greatest value to those who have obtained it .
finally , i placed it in project , rather than user space because i had hoped that others who felt similarly would help work on the essay and subscribe to its values , elements that i felt a userspace essay would not prompt .
after a general revaluation of values , he found himself able to keep his thresholds at the normal level .
the ziegler school of rabbinic studies is a five-year rabbinical school that values rigorous scholarship as well as spirituality .
in the events that follow , the beliefs and values of both families will be challenged , secrets will be unearthed , and new ties will be forged .
for example , there can be " policy " values designed for a site 's internal use only , which need no registration .
his wealth was an integral part of him , one of the many great values attached to his personality -- he felt that he was wise and witty , capable and coercive .
canada does not issue newspaper or periodical stamps so these two high values can be used in this way . ''
values education , which encompasses the endangered filipino values , and which is integrated in all subjects .
government , business and values .
this formula was originally stated for the computation of the values of the sine function for which the common interval in the underlying base table was 900 minutes or 15 degrees .
the prices put down are the estimated values of the materials delivered into the permanent way stores of our own home railways , and are exclusive of all costs of freight , carriage , or distribution to the site of laying down .
there is no doubt that they are building up a new kind of poetry , with values that sound strange perhaps to the unfamiliar ear , but which bid fair to enlarge the field for the poetic genius and enrich it permanently .
with the acceleration of the temperature drop , there always occurs a more marked increase of the blood sugar to maximal values which may attain an average _increase of 80 percent_ and in a few cases may reach an _increase of over 100 percent_ .
if people had the courage to buy only what appealed to them personally , there would be a mighty crash in tumbling values . ''
more probable values .
the origin of the goes back to gottfried leibniz , who in the seventeenth century , after having constructed a successful mechanical calculating machine , dreamt of building a machine that could manipulate symbols in order to determine the truth values of mathematical statements .
to support the transatlantic alliance , and solidarity with the united states of america in the common values of free nations .
and her high past she values now , in chief , as fit foundation of that edifice whereon she labors day by day , and with augmenting strokes . ''
social conservatives see traditional social values as threatened by secularism ; they tend to support school prayer and the second amendment rights of private citizens to own firearms and to oppose abortion and oppose same-sex marriage .
individuals and institutions are under one law , one law of use , one measure of values .
raids and prosecutions called attention to the changed character of the neighborhood , and property values sank still lower .
when the drawings were accepted , they came out so reduced and so badly reproduced that the subtleties were blurred away , and the values quite transmuted .
antarah 's poetry is well preserved and often talks of chivalrous values , courage and heroism in battle as well as his love for ʿabla .
resistive instabilities are an issue for all magnetic configurations , since the onset can occur at beta values well below the ideal limit .
these vary slightly depending on sources and atwater derived weighted values for the gross heat of combustion of the protein , fat and carbohydrate in the typical mixed diet of his time .
the valuation of real estate was left in the hands of real estate experts familiar with values in chicago , each piece of property being personally examined and valued , and the representatives of the roads given such hearings as they desired .
for the moment there is little chance that his insistence upon following the highest values which his conscience recognizes will bring an end to war , because there are not enough others who share his convictions .
traditional values versus secular-rational values .
will be sufficient for the computation of the corresponding values of v , or the enlargement of volume which water undergoes in passing into steam .
corefoundation constants kcfbooleantrue and kcfbooleanfalse for nsnumber with boolean values .
real values are enhanced by reduction in the cost of the price of production .
although hoa foreclosures are ostensibly motivated by efforts to improve property values , neither foreclosure activity nor hoas appear linked with the above average home price growth .
a critical loss of moral or ethical values may take place during or past a major cataclysm which strikes a given society .
it was an upsetting of the table of values , an astonishing excitement .
for all values of i , j , k and t. determination of the distinct types of continuous groups of a given order .
the difference between the oer- and ppp- denominated gdp values for most of the weathly industrialized countries are generally much smaller .
he is currently researching and writing a book on the theme of heritage and faith in the formation of culture and values in traditional church schools .
doubtless , increased numbers of people , oriented toward mineral and other resource exploitation rather than toward traditional wildland values , will compound these problems .
the fitness of the solution is the sum of values of all objects in the knapsack if the representation is valid , or 0 otherwise .
but it may act as a stimulus to a reinvention within the confines of the recipient culture of a similar institution consonant with the values of the recipient .
as goldmann explains , the authentic values are not concretely present in the work ; rather , they are only present abstractly in the mind of the writer .
it is , moreover , equally absurd to look upon moral values as ultimate and irreducible categories of good and evil , irrevocably codified by an omniscient deity for the conduct of humanity for all time , and supposedly accessible to the intelligence of all who consult their conscience .
the society is not based on traditional values , but on democracy and the equal status of the members .
value measuring methodology ( or vmm ) is a tool that helps financial planners balance both tangible and intangible values when making investment decisions , and monitor benefits .
i believe that all other combinations of x and y yield smaller c values , but i cannot prove it formally .
opponents of tort reform would argue that members of the legislature are at a greater risk for assigning arbitrary dollar values to non-economic damages than juries ; members of the legislature are not present at trial and do not get to observe evidence , witness testimony , etc .
moffitt is the founder of the life balance institute , a non-profit organization dedicated to the study and practice of spiritual values in daily life .
he rests perfectly content to allow god to place his own values .
dec 2004 tukan uploaded " mj _ values .
anti-school values displayed by these children are often derived from their consciousness of their real interests .
similarly , when we talk about the relative values of freedom and non-freedom , it becomes a mere play of words .
the corrected values of the friction are shown in the third column of table iii .
it was included as one of the top values for academic quality and affordability out of more than 600 private institutions .
today , clairbourn honors its religious heritage with a simple chapel assembly each morning where universal christian values from the bible are shared and a hymn is sung .
as a result of such calculations , the following table for the corresponding values of x and d , as used in the above formula , are there presented , each expressed in inches .
now , let us make a comparison by values , calling the cheese 10 cents and the butter 25 cents a pound .
second : to study ancient religions , philosophies and sciences , and determine their relations and values .
the israel defence forces said yesterday that the t-shirts " are not in accordance with idf values and are simply tasteless .
major western theorists who stress the importance of values as an analytical independent variable include max weber , émile durkheim , talcott parsons and jürgen habermas .
175 '' the world '' to christianity means that a man is a soldier , a judge , a patriot , that he defends himself , that he values his honour , that he desires his own advantage , that he is _proud._ ...
incidentally , she learned much about food values and purchasing .
old values have been purged .
this is something which has often been ignored under ' traditional ' ir as positivist theories make a distinction between ' facts ' and normative judgments , or ' values ' .
these mean values of the three magnetic elements , namely , the declination , inclination or dip , and magnetic intensity , are well known to be subject to secular , annual , and diurnal variations .
just before we got to kiev , one of those men in sheepskins with uncut hair and dogged expression , who had a sense of values in human existence , broke into the church and stole jeweled chalices from the altar .
the eyes of the most feminine women in the world , denying their smiles and their lure , had discovered to him something which marked a definite change in his estimate of certain ultimate earthly values .
therefore both of them , not wishing to deprive themselves of the rich values that lie buried in the collective psyche , will endeavour by every means possible to retain their newly gained union with the primal cause of life .
at such a point p , the normal vector space is the vector space generated by the values at p of the gradient vectors of the fi .
this convolution brings the value of each pixel into closer harmony with the values of its neighbors .
every employer will respect the man who states , with salesmanship , a sound reason for selecting and seeking connection with a business house ; since such a man gives promise of making the sort of dependable , loyal worker that every business values and appreciates .
what he felt was more than pity ; he was experiencing , indeed , but with a deeper emotion , something of that same confusion of values into which eleanor goodrich 's visit had thrown him .
this is the approach of daniell for the case of real-valued functions on a set , generalized by nicolas bourbaki to functions with values in a locally compact topological vector space .
for the contribution made by the ordinary worker , _as a part of a productive organization_ , to the total of market values produced , is largely settled thereby .
even in dealing with color he turned to mathematics and made his values quantitative .
`` _brisk , _ -- a brisk , airy , fantastic , singing , dancing coxcomb , that sets up for a well-bred man , and a man of honour ; but mistakes in every thing , and values himself only upon the vanity and foppery of gentlemen . ''
the ore contains free gold , which is extracted by the simple process of stamping and amalgamation , and refractory values , extracted by the cyaniding process .
( _i_ ) what is the effect upon values of large terminals ?
but of this he soon became convinced , that whenever and wherever good and evil had been set up as absolute values , they had been thus elevated to power with the view of preserving and multiplying one specific type of man .
kansas cartoonist alonzo washington is the creator of omega man , a self-published title about a socially conscious african-american comic book superhero who concentrates on positive , ethical values .
its interest turns upon the different values attached to a deed of love , by judas [ 25 ] on the one hand , and by jesus on the other .
spinoza thus replaces morality , which in deleuze 's words " always refers existence to transcendent values " and which represents god 's judgment , with ethics , " a typology of immanent modes of existence " .
this new magazine , titled gentry , featured high production values , and was sent to every home in the highly affluent silicon valley cities of atherton , palo alto , menlo park and woodside .
do values depend on wages ?
groups establish these norms based on specific group values and goals and may establish sanctions in response to deviation from these norms .
the need of such general points of view is the greater because of a tendency to segregate educational values due to the isolation from one another of the various pursuits of life .
the zero error , or absolute values , are not wanted for levelling , only delicacy in small variations .
it was always a trick of hers to pretend to think nothing of rank ; -- but she values her place as highly as any woman in england . ''
peace is to be revered more than all other values .
but as contemplation is actually a luxury in our lives , and things interest us chiefly on passionate and practical grounds , the accumulation of values too exclusively aesthetic produces in our minds an effect of closeness and artificiality .
here is one of his own blurbs , which we quote from mr. newton 's book : boswell , the author , is a most excellent man : he is of an ancient family in the west of scotland , upon which he values himself not a little .
the required values can vary from 0 .
each dialect continues the general drift of the common parent , but has not been able to hold fast to constant values for each component of the drift .
in a speech , wulff also expressed his opposition to euthanasia and warned of a retreat of moral values .
in order to understand the principles that govern the players in their declarations , one should be thoroughly familiar with the values attached to the tricks when certain suits are trumps .
while the country braced itself up to an effort such as no one had thought within its powers , the individual crawled as he best could , through the wreck , and found many values of life upset .
advance care planning aims to allow people to live well , and when death approaches , die in accordance with their personal values .
an enthusiasm for the noble and uplifting , a belief in duty and discipline of the mind , a faith in ideals and eternal values must permeate the world of the screen .
utilities and labor pains are parts , but minor parts , in the explanation of social values .
it was a time when pesantren were desperate to gain state funding by adopting state-endorsed curricula and wahid was concerned that the traditional values of the pesantren were being damaged because of this change .
mr ogilby assorted his wares in the most tempting manner , and it is interesting to know what were considered the most marketable books , with their relative values , over two hundred years ago .
house slave were usually better off than field hands , but , because they lived in such proximity to their masters , they were much quicker to adopt the master 's values and tended to be more obsequious .
even greater gains have sometimes been reaped by the owners of timber lands , ore mines , coal lands , and other natural resources , the values of which have been raised by tariff legislation .
it must be admitted that the values of such treasures go strictly by comparison .
there was a clash however between this fame for glory at his coronation and christian values he was trying to impart to his readers .
chroma from the red pixels will be reconstructed onto the black pixels , causing the new pixels to have positive red and negative green and blue values .
for any given value of x , arctan ( x ) ( sometimes written as tan x ) has multiple values , differing from each other by integer numbers of half turns .
instead , if the values are stored as leaves in a tree whose inner nodes store the values of the subtree rooted at that node .
although their methods in controversy against the church must be condemned by everyone who values intellectual honesty , the reader , of his charity , should remember that malthusians are unable to defend their policy , either on logical or on moral grounds .
his ideal seems to have been a christian-human royal power taking care of intellectual and cultural values .
increasing population meant rapidly rising land values , exercising an irresistible lure to many of the more active speculators of the northern neck .
in the beggar and the professor , le roy ladurie used the letters and memoirs of the platter family to examine the social values of the 16th century , especially in regards to religion , medicine , crime , learning , and taxes .
the power dissipated is equal to i^2r watts , and by giving suitable values to i and r any required amount of heat per second can be obtained .
well , to my mind this whole affair of mystical values and experiences comes down to a simple straight-away proposition .
hankey , the christmas poo " and " big gay al 's big gay boat ride " , which he felt included moral values and a " sweet side to it " among the sophomoric humor .
a code page represents a particular assignment of code point values to glyphs .
it is hoped that this discussion of comparative ghost-lore may help to establish a better sense of values .
the more unequal the abundances of the types , the larger the weighted geometric mean of the p _ i values , and the smaller the corresponding shannon entropy .
=color sensitiveness.=—complete specifications for an aerial plate can not be made solely on the basis of its speed , contrast , latitude , threshold , and other sensitometric values which have to do only with the intensity of the light acting on it .
to her these were the chief values of life . ''
the various facts about the different values of " stones " are covered in the stone ( unit ) article .
a compiler uses methods to identify loops and recognize the characteristics of register values within those loops .
ittijah , union of arab community-based organisations in israel , has said ngo monitor represents the interests and the say of the israeli state rather than civil society 's voice based on human rights values .
the permanent values of all things which are neither under a natural nor under an artificial monopoly depend , as we have seen , on their cost of production .
the principles of the javelina honor code include five fundamental values that must be adhered by students , including honesty , trust , fairness , respect and responsibility .
similarly , calculating the sample variance will result in values that grow larger as more samples are taken .
# laws of supply and demand. # in the next place , we must try to understand how the values of things are governed , and made to change from time to time .
the sum of all these values will give the standard enthalpy of formation of sodium chloride .
it is not merely false ideas of the values of life that have to be re-formed , but ideas once true .
with the values , however , the case is clearer .
vile weather , an impatient fretting against unbearable slowness and delay , sea -- sickness , general discomfort and humiliating self -- revelation are the master values of these memories .
it is simply a question of the adjustment of values .
the direct economic values that we have specified for seabirds are really not very impressive , even in terms of the costs involved in conserving and studying them .
many polish-americans were traditional values voters , and felt wronged by richard nixon during the scandal .
browning again and again protests , as blake had done earlier , against the mean moral values of his age .
the index is based on a repeat valuation methodology that tracks capital values of prime central london residential property .
the careful trader tries to get good advice on the markets and the values of stocks .
in more recent times the basic bach has been replaced by the modern " holiday house " , more substantial , more expensive ( reflecting increasing affluence , and vastly increased coastal land values ) and usually professionally built ( due to stricter building codes ) .
he knew about values . ''
if [ their ] natural or cost values always continued to bear the same ratio to one another , the arrangement would be unobjectionable .
the purpose and theme in this series was to publicize and stimulate interest in the natural history values of the park and the appreciation of nature through an increased knowledge and understanding .
because hackers as a group are particularly creative people who define themselves partly by rejection of ` normal ' values and working habits , it has unusually rich and conscious traditions for an intentional culture less than 35 years old .
he will also learn the degree of elevation required by his bow at the various distances , which elevation he will always give by raising or lowering his _left_ hand , and in no other way , if he values success .
this allowed us to reuse the existing resistor values , rather than having a completely unique set for each color .
-- _athenæum._ the values of old english silver & sheffield plate , from the fifteenth to the nineteenth centuries .
this means that the inverse function will only give values in the domain of the function , but restricted to a single period .
people of rimrock ; a study of values in five cultures .
the energy values corresponding to the transition states and the ground state of the reactants and products can be found using the potential energy function by calculating the function 's critical points or the stationary points .
the colours of both values were unchanged , and , allowing for the difference of appearance in messrs. de la rue & co. ’ s stamps , caused by the whiteness and surfacing of the paper , there is hardly any change to be noticed even in their shades .
while it is still held that emphasis must be laid upon the specific character of mental training , there are some generalized powers and values to be obtained .
the general range of values , under our present system of division of labor , private property , private enterprise , etc. , depend on the possibility of exchange .
in mathematics , a subadditive set function is a set function whose value , informally , has the property that the value of function on the union of two sets is at most the sum of values of the function on each of the sets .
acceptable industrial values for prebaked consumable carbon anodes .
on 23 april 2009 , the california air resources board approved the specific rules and carbon intensity reference values for the california low-carbon fuel standard ( lcfs ) that will go into effect on 1 january 2011 .
in contrast , the interpretivists argue that it is impossible for research to be completely free of personal values , as research is always biased towards the values of the researcher .
whereas the physical quantity indicated by any physical constant does not depend on the unit system used to express the quantity , the numerical values of dimensional physical constants do depend on the unit used .
it is through the realization that one is the sole being responsible for rendering life meaningful that values are actualized and life becomes meaningful .
every race must , therefore , be regarded not as representing a single point of mental development , but as a continuum of mental values with a certain range of variation .
judeo-christian values are the foundation of the educational and social environment of the university .
strongly oppose as being in direct opposition to fundamental wikipedia values and policies .
archbishop riordan high school , an archdiocesan catholic high school in the marianist tradition , develops the character of young men and instills christian values in an environment of academic excellence that reflects the cultural diversity of the san francisco bay area .
and all these values are felt as completely objectified , and so fulfill the requirements for `` beauty in the second term . ''
energies and eigenstates on some high symmetry points in the brillouin zone can be evaluated and values integrals in the matrix elements can be matched with band structure data from other sources .
for all his pretended stoicism , my father values a title as keenly as most men , and at heart is anxious to see his daughter a countess . ''
as these first values were exhausted , he moved on to new territories .
by substituting these values in the formula we obtain ‹v› = 32 feet per second .
perhaps she has a keener sense of values .
the islamic traditions are outstanding in the area and have high moral values in the society .
inputs are usually specified syntactically in the form of arguments and the outputs delivered as return values .
this is absolutely not the case , and it is important for the protection of american values that these sort of topics be discussed and understood .
bobo defines symbolic racism as a form of learned social values that involve the protestant ethic and anti-black sentiments and fears in a framework where overt segregation and biological racism are less severe .
he was educated initially in a public high school nearby and then enrolled in the brooklyn college , where he underwent an intellectual revolution putting in question his catholic values .
steve murmured , half inaudibly , `` i keep forgetting you have never been taught values or sincerity !
in these languages , every noun inherently carries one value of the grammatical category called gender ; the values present in a given language ( of which there are usually two or three ) are called the genders of that language .
first of all , in planning the costuming for a play a definite color scheme should be decided on with due regard for the scenery against which the colors are to stand out and for the lights which will greatly affect all values .
for example , if the system uses a byte-code interpreter , it must allow new byte-code values to be defined .
onf functions the same as this template , but with the base and primary values reversed .
wikipedia values your contributions but you do not own them , and sometimes the community decides to go in a different direction .
default data editor not available used to define some system-wide default values .
unlike france , great britain does not rival spain in wines , oils , fruits , and other indigenous products of southern skies , and therefore is the more free to act upon the equitable principle of fair exchange in values for values .
the anisotropic filtering method most commonly implemented on graphics hardware is the composition of the filtered pixel values from only one line of mip map samples , which is referred to as " footprint assembly " .
it will be observed that , in speaking of the values of commodities , at different periods , as meaning their different powers of purchasing at those periods , the kind of value referred to is , exclusively , value in exchange .
the values of c1 , c2 , ... can occasionally be calculated from the analytical expressions for the differential coefficients of u ; but more generally they have to be calculated from the tabulated differences .
taylor jones subsequently found a good agreement between the theoretical and the observed values of the tractive force in fields ranging up to very high intensities ( _phil .
the same principle which we found to apply in the case of the railways would serve here in readjusting values , viz .
the editorial pieces of the weekly show liberal , libertarian values .
some support is provided for logical values , relational operators ( the fortran syntax can be used ) and logical expressions .
for this reason all angles of elevation to himalayan peaks measured from the plains , as mount everest was measured , are too small and consequently all our values of himalayan heights are too small .
german weather service indicate lower values .
the idea would be to use rgb colour values formatted in css using the rgb ( ) notation , e .
media help citizens clarify values ( equality , freedom , honesty , forgiveness ) often by precipitating information about value conflicts .
in the matter of authorities , he follows a dangerous and insidious eclecticism , preferring those who support the point of view which he has chosen , without a proper regard for their intrinsic values .
the methods gave almost identical results and his final values are to three decimal places the same as those obtained by boys .
he is grateful by one of those arbitrary values that dear g.m. , for instance , does n't positively command , in proportion to his intrinsic weight ; and who can say quite why ?
this aggregated data has in the past included demographic data , social profiles , and estimated property and wealth values .
a systemverilog coverage group creates a database of " bins " that store a histogram of values of an associated variable .
acf was a principal party at the fox inquiry into mining at ranger in kakadu and pressed for the creation of a major national park to protect both the natural and cultural values of the area .
the housekeeper , mrs. lowell , was a `` broken down gentlewoman '' who had been chastened by misfortune into a wholesome state of practical good sense about the relative values of the real and the romantic .
it is true , as has been shown above , that the mere putting of an estimate on a durable good such as land involves the process of capitalization , which in turn implies a comparison of the values of the rents expected at different periods .
when profits vary from employment to employment , or are spread over unequal lengths of time , they affect values accordingly .
nietzsche rejects morality as incompatible with the sovereignty of selfhood , and , pronouncing our former judgment a superstition , he proposes `` a transvaluation of all values . ''
’ tis plate of rare device , and jewels of rich and exquisite form , their values great ; and i am something curious , being strange , to have them in safe stowage .
interpretation of these values are not standard and vary based on specific laboratory values and clinical context .
the humorist knows values , and that is why he laughs .
sommers devoted a chapter to a negative depiction of a " feminist classroom " where the values of the teacher overwhelmed the students .
in the case of the preferred stock , where values were greater and assessments less heavy , the results were not the same ; but even here the proportional demand was large , and amounted to 100 per cent of current quotations in the case of the northern pacific .
their new values are recorded in the trace table .
the valuation of mines arises not only from their change of ownership , but from the necessity in sound administration for a knowledge of some of the fundamentals of valuation , such as ore reserves and average values , that managerial and financial policy may be guided aright .
there never was a monopoly of righteousness in the world , though there was a coin of fair exchange between men who were intelligent enough to perceive its values , in which there was no alloy of bribery .
thinkest thou he values his poor head so lightly that he trusts it there ?
delta psi chi is defined by the values which are collectively accepted by its members .
cp ( t ) , as well as the values of g298 k and s298 k for many species are tabularized in the literature .
order of alphabetslikewise many other languages of the world including arabic , greek , hebrew and chinese , the alphabets are not named after their respective phoneme values .
peroutka , a member of the board of directors of the conservative caucus at the time , focused exclusively on pro-life and family values issues , and featured some of the top activists and leaders promoting an end to abortion .
growth will not be greater than the aggregate values of the growth factors .
the church school has a stated goal of encouraging children " to seek their own truths , to clarify their values , and to live lives of meaning inspired by those values .
kou takes to heart what aoba has to say and values her opinion more than others .
thus corrected his values are as follows : -- temperature 10° 15° 20° 25° 30° 35° joules per cal .
even now , decades after his death , his stories and poems still remain - sharing his dreams and ideals , whispering the great tales of the african values and culture , never to be forgotten .
[ notan , two values , variations of a motif .
i wanted to get your notion of the tints ; but look at this—i am not quite sure i myself see colors at their true values .
this makes one necessarily skeptical of the claim that promotion of lq is somehow an attack on us language values and the integrity of american english .
a notable problem occurs when information gain is applied to attributes that can take on a large number of distinct values .
the standardization must be repeated until the values obtained agree within , at most , two parts in one thousand .
this formalizes the natural intuition that for " very large " values of the index , the terms in the sequence are " very close " to the limit value of the sequence .
the rightful heir values my life so highly , that he himself has instigated this offer .
greater tolls on values are taken by those who handle the mechanism of exchange .
a major limitation of the single sucrose gap is that it cannot determine the real values of the membrane potential and action potential amplitudes .
in this approach , abundances were taken from the umist database for astrochemistry 2006 , and the values are relatives to the h2 density .
education and the national strategy plan te kakeega iithe education strategy is described in te kakeega ii ( tuvalu national strategy for sustainable development 2005-2015 ) as being that " by 2015 , guided by strong spiritual values enshrined in its motto .
partial-matching is where the intermediate values of the mitm attack , i and j , computed from the plaintext and ciphertext , are matched on only a few select bits , instead of on the complete state .
to catch the flying values of life , and convey them to other minds and hearts in a few pages of picture may seem easy to the lay reader , but is , i do assure him , mortal hard .
this includes their characteristic values , information on their weapon options , and any limitations on their use , as well as background information on each unit .
masturbation can be shown to stand in the way of all that youth rightly values in its present happy school life and play , it can be proved to prevent the accomplishment of what every healthy school ideal demands as the future functions of maturity .
there are multiple values of phonation , one being the typical one ( what some phoneticians call " modal voicing " ) .
this subject was born upon a recommendation of the council of europe that states the necessity of education for citizenship , in order to promote civic and human values .
its running time is linear in the number of items and the difference between the maximum and minimum key values , so it is only suitable for direct use in situations where the variation in keys is not significantly greater than the number of items .
the vulgarity into which he so incongruously drops is , i will not say the space he allots to love-affairs , but the weakness of his sense of “ values ” in depicting them .
as regards human values , it is a higher privilege to be a charming personality than to be a successful stockbroker .
it was not the conquest he figured on however , because events are merely single values that fit the cubic equation , -- never the equation itself .
the reasoning for deleting unsourced blps is simple and it has nothing to do with a misplaced obsession with p values .
on the other hand , the rapid increase in land values leaves the society on the safe side should the tenant purchaser be unfortunate or lacking in enterprise .
the serum metabolome database is a freely web database about small molecule metabolites found in human serum and their concentration values .
prior to the great crash of 1890 , a half billion dollars worth of securities in gold values were sold at this exchange .
sarin 's music has accompanied the play across india and the response has been positive , with compliments for the track 's high production values and instrumentation .
bac values are missing or unknown .
it is the school 's commitment to provide students with a safe , positive , and challenging environment that cultivates catholic faith and values .
intelligent motivation in teaching has far-reaching values for both student and teacher .
if the control volume is a polyhedron and values are assumed constant over each face , the area integrals can be written as summations over each face .
this , it seems to me , is one of the great values of fiction .
because the queries are parametrized during parsing , two queries that differ only by the values of literal constants share the same cache entry .
the soundness of his judgment and the clearness of his vision were indicated in the rise in his property values , making his holdings well worthy of consideration .
akilam teaches a set of values that are theological , sociological and philosophical .
he values its visual effectiveness , rational order and its possibility of continuous variation .
the value of real estate has changed substantially in the past year , so values may be out of date .
he is ready to welcome a _reductio ad absurdum_ for a demonstration ; yet he values the society of men of the ordinary turn of mind precisely because his love of oddities makes him relish a contradiction .
`` the very secret and essence of thrift consists in getting things into higher values .
bad values on the other hand are those that are relied on so much that it makes you unresponsive to the needs and perspectives of others .
among the sets of values of the parameters there must be one which gives the identical transformation .
the object of a trick-taking game is based on the play of multiple rounds , or tricks , in each of which each player plays a single card from their hand , and based on the values of played cards one player wins or " takes " the trick .
consequently , measurements of the properties of enzymes or processes in metabolism that are made in the laboratory ( in vitro ) in dilute solutions may be different by many orders of magnitude from the true values seen in living cells ( in vivo ) .
a scrollbar should be distinguished from a slider which is another object that works in a similar fashion , the difference being that the slider is used to change values , and does not change the display or move the area that is shown .
substituting these values into eq .
experiences are intentionally designed , presented , and reflected upon to instill values and promote skills .
first pressings of original commercial releases usually have higher values than later pressings .
all future cash flows are estimated and discounted by using cost of capital to give their present values ( pvs ) .
the work attempts to resolve a humanistic ( confucian ) concern for moral values and benevolent government with an administrative ( legalist ) need for strict , predictable rewards and punishments .
their main objective is to involve young people in politics through supporting the policies , principles and values of the party by developing the 48th article of the spanish constitution .
he leaned toward me , looking with a quiet sort of meaning into my face : '' suppose you put that mind of yours , that wilbur whitney values so highly and i ’ m beginning to see indications of , on that question . ''
it supports lists of any integral type , but works properly only with non-negative values .
first `` an '' ; then stop a little ; `` tánana , '' same values as traveller ; and finally `` rivo . ''
from what has been said , it is evident , that there must be found in england two legal pounds sterling , of different values ; the one worth 113 grains of fine gold , the other worth 1718.7 grains of fine silver .
rental levels for different types of property and for properties in different locations may change over time by varying amounts due to many factors , including economic , social and demographic changes which affect property values .
where has the war , and the complex of desires it developed , left our moral values ?
the values which it assigns to the year are the arithmetic means of the 12 monthly values .
money values she was positively ignorant of .
their research formed a basis of what would later be known as mak values ( maximale arbeitsplatz-konzentration ) in germany .
not a very just estimate of relative values , but a very usual one when narcissus is absorbed with the reflection of himself .
by means of the values of this ideal , the growth of such higher men would be checked at the root .
here were , it was evident , new material , new method and a new insistence upon intellectual values in the theater .
what values are there of more universal validity than the rational or mathematical value and the volitional or teleological value of the universe in conflict with one another ?
it bore various local values , but according to the old madras monetary system , prevailing till 1818 , 42 _fanams_ went to one star pagoda , and a madras _fanam_ was therefore worth about 2d .
[ footnote 13 : £150 in pre-war values .
while one 's circle of friends changed with one 's interests and values , pen pals were sufficiently detached from the prejudices of the immediate atmosphere and therefore became friends at a safe distance to whom feelings could be written without the usual fear of confidentiality .
a transvaluation of all values is certainly needed , and it is taking place now .
the history of israel is invaluable as a typical history of an attempt to _denaturize_ all natural values : i point to five facts which bear this out .
to build the index we compare the data values at the cell corners with the two contour threshold values .
he has developed no sense of values .
one uses chinese characters phonetically , as a syllabary of 2082 glyphs , and the other is an alphabetic romanisation system with similar sound values and tone spellings to gwoyeu romatzyh .
if one says , “ come , sell me that fowl , or cloth , ” the reply is , “ come to the market place. ” the values there are more satisfactory and the transaction is open .
in a similar fashion , constants appear in the solutions to differential equations where not enough initial values or boundary conditions are given .
but while she felt all this , her keen sense of true values withheld her from putting a trumpet to her lips and declaring it .
if , for example , in some local area the water table continues to drop and the topsoil to blow away , the land values will disappear with the water and the soil .
pessimism , despair , nihilism , -- that is , disbelief in all values of life .
study an animal pose , and plan to make a large sketch that will show its coloring , or values of light and dark .
cultural probes can be used for idea generation , inspiration , values and dreams in a design process .
in others the methods of taking samples and clearing the sap have been improved so far as to allow the [ 809 ] exact determination of three hundred thousand polarization values of beets within a few weeks .
this booklet is an attempt to provide a concise summary of some of the park ’ s important natural values and to arouse your appetite for further pursuit of the enjoyment they offer .
empowered by gospel values and rooted in the spirit and tradition of st .
this is because we can reduce the apparent noise ( non-diffusion contributions to signal ) at higher b values ( a combination of gradient strength and pulse duration ) and improve the spatial resolution .
upon storage , db2 preserves the internal structure of xml data , converting its tag names and other information into integer values .
cartelli discusses the implications this has in the context of jewish immigration to new york and suggests that mackaye is asserting the values of white anglo-saxon protestantism in a way comparable to senator albert beveridge 's concerns raised at the turn of the century .
the latter gives values of the constants a and b for different samples of iron and steel , some of which are shown in the following table : -- [ kappa ] = a + bh metal .
the values are multiplied by the weighted values and the total ef is determined .
yet relative to other units of measurement such as si , the values of the planck units are only known approximately .
in connection with the international treaty between great britain and france , i was selected by my co-directors to classify and place average permanent values on the manufactures of the district , in order to regulate their admission under that treaty with france .
the whole poem shows a pre-raphaelite love of detail combined with a remarkable appreciation of dramatic values , and the same is true of many of the other rhyming chronicles , political poems , and topical ballads .
these values are rooted deeply and firmly within western society .
debit.= the term _debit_ designates those items in an account representing values with which we have parted , or transferred to another person or account .
a constraint is m-tight if every evaluation to all its variables but one can be extended to satisfy the constraint either by all possible values of the other variable or by at most m of its values .
the lcs also work to guide chapter members to realize leadership and achieve , more fully , the ideals , objectives , and values of the fraternity .
churches as enhancers of real estate values .
an augmented version of a subject , for instance , will not simply double all the note values , but rather double some , triple another , leave another intact , etc .
this feature could take on multiple values to indicate various levels of stress .
science does not generate its own moral values ; it can be used for good or ill and has been .
the profit to the treasury was enormous ; the disturbance of values and the dislocation of trade were proportionately great .
silver coins of two values have been found in sussex ( j. evans , _coins of the anc .
matthay believes , and rightly , that the beginning pupil should learn essentials of note values , rhythm , time , ear-training and so on , before attempting to play anything at the piano .
it also marks the beginning of the hindu age of kali ( kali yuga ) , where the great values and noble ideas have crumbled , and man is speedily heading toward the complete dissolution of right action , morality and virtue .
religious values are ethical principles founded in religious traditions , texts and beliefs .
the little girl maintains human values even in a world of terror and oppression .
| per cent values .
these values are believed to be as accurate as the best modern determinations allow , but there are some differences amongst various observers and absolute exactness can not be obtained .
in statistics , the probability integral transform or transformation relates to the result that data values that are modelled as being random variables from any given continuous distribution can be converted to random variables having a uniform distribution .
tag all lucknow-relevant articles with , and assess and prioritize articles missing assessment or importance values .
this process of implementing gang injunctions is directly linked to gentrification , because the gang activity in these neighborhoods causes property values to drop , making it more affordable for others to move into the neighborhood .
if the above formula is implemented directly , you will compute values that are subsequently flushed by the down-sampling .
nothing is discarded , but 200 values of each output block must be " saved " for the addition with the next block .
le refus global was a manifesto that completely rejected the social , artistic and psychological norms and values of québécois society at the time .
it is the tired man with a headache who values a work of art for what it does not contain .
packed particle columns have pore connectivity values of about 1 .
the development of _nihilism out of pessimism._ the denaturalisation of _values._ scholasticism of values .
the series uses spectacular envoroments and high production values to give a backdrop to an origional format that creates gripping non-scripted high drama .
besides the academic subjects , the school has special emphasis on moral education , civil and cultural values .
she knew their meaning now , their relative value , and she knew other values .
carbon isotopes in marine limestone from the capitanian age show an increase in δ13c values .
future articulation of nursing and its contributions would emanate from the values and assumptions offered in the nursing as caring theory .
for example , his values of distance are often faulty , and give the unpleasant sensation that one figure is standing on the top of another , [ 39 ] a defect of carelessness , for no one is a better master of aerial perspective when he chooses .
like cultural values , self-esteem acts to protect one against the terror of death .
it was exhausted by a desperate struggle with mud , dust , floods , droughts , cholera , debt , panics , broken banks , and a slump in land values .
that a man who values his reputation -- that a minister of the gospel of mr. b's intelligence and knowledge of the country 's condition and history in regard to this matter , should make such a declaration , is truly most wonderful .
the national park was established in 2006 to preserve biodiversity and conservation values in the area .
the plates of all values printed 200 stamps each upon the sheet .
but the terrorist had supplied these deficiencies , and he had made it hard to rid oneself of the supposition that one had only to cross a few yards of unowned hollows to find oneself in a world of new values and formulæ .
he argues that one has to do with eternal values and therefore with reform rather than change , a view underpinning edmund burke 's condemnation of the french revolution and all conservatives since .
additionally , it would be nice if a bot could take values from the page and update changes of the coefficients .
_change in the character of a neighborhood._ -- depreciation in property values in large cities is due in marked degree to factors not purely physical .
mime , the modern standard of e-mail format , forbids encoding of headers using byte values above the ascii range .
at present , land values are far more stable , and real estate is everywhere included among the most conservative of investments , proper for all with the one exception of commercial banks .
where these methods differ is in how they determine which values to store .
let x take all real values from - [ oo ] to [ oo ] .
human brotherhood is rejected , even more than all the other traditional moral values .
one full-grown hen or rooster ... .. 0.125 the values above indicated are based on the monetary terms used to represent their value , and borrowed , possibly , from the terms which are still in vogue in eastern mindanáo .
integer return values ( similar to x86 ) are returned in rax if 64 bits or less .
green numbers are rounded values of population density .
celeste found out about him from the headwaiter , '' she said , with the security of one who treats of recognized values .
[ 473 ] for discussions of the idea of measuring values , and the dependence of this on the conception of value as an absolute quantity , a common or generic quality of wealth , see knies , _das geld_ , i , 113ff .
the imagination has free scope to magnify his power and invest him with all the ideal values it can conceive .
while we know that the public highly values our services , the new digital media and the recent economic difficulties have combined to threaten all our forms of support .
thus will the balance of the social and individual work in the satisfaction of human wants be preserved , while the number of those wants increase and assume different values with the progress of the social and individual life .
dta values flexibility by incorporating possible events ( or states ) and consequent management decisions .
through both singh 's family and rani , badal is given a new lease of life and comes to understand the values of sentiments , love and relationships , all of which he has missed out on in his life .
if my reader is a mother it will not take very long for her to justly determine the values .
the vl2c also featured an upgraded processor board , to better handle the demands made by extra features offered in later versions of the series 200 operating system software , such as the application of timing values ( rather than a simple speed ) to the various functions .
he works not merely for intensive cultivation of the soil , but also for the preservation of the soil and use of it in its own terms , at its highest values .
these represented cash values , penalty spaces , and strategic elements for use in the game .
( 10 ) the fruit is then filled with assorted colors , graded from white to black , according to their values , and disposed by their hues in the five sections .
they obtained an initial assessment of microbial diversity in their environmental samples from soil maintained for 36 years at the various ph values .
almost everything mankind values seemed within our grasp .
although spyro 's production values have shot up , its gameplay has remained more or less the same since the series ' 1998 debut .
this includes criteria addressing accountability , integrity , ethical values and qualifications of personnel , and the environment in which they function .
the paper focused on working-class issues , religious values , and opposition to abortion .
victorian values were developed in all facets of victorian living .
protection of land values is maintained by stratifying the zoning districts into levels according to their location in the urban society ( neighborhood , community , municipality , and region ) .
similarly , in new zealand , the adoption in 1891 of the tax on land values brought prosperity to the towns , and changed the tide of emigration from new zealand into immigration .
when you have got character and values and true representation of color , you will find that the '' finish '' is there without your having bothered about it .
wilde noted that when sweden changed from driving on the left to driving on the right in 1967 , this was followed by a marked reduction in the traffic fatality rate for 18 months after which the trend returned to its previous values .
for oxyacids with more than one ionizable hydrogen on the same atom , the pka values often increase by about 5 units for each proton removed , as in the example of phosphoric acid above .
table 3.—average values per acre of country lands , of the 1900 appraisal , of the jackson , lansing and saginaw railroad , after all the percentages and fixed charges were added .
the entry includes both a signed field with the signs and a sequence field consisting of all the values passed through the absolute value function .
these values are claimed to lead to the code ; isolation and solidarity leading to police officers sticking to their own kind , producing an us-against-them mentality .
the values of the wine list ( before the war , most important ) would always remain a mystery to us .
it explores the interaction between ecological values , such as sustainability , and the human domination of nature .
`` i have thought she would not mind giving up many things she values , if one could win her affection . ''
however , even the version of this algorithm with a single stack is not a pointer algorithm , due to the comparisons needed to determine which of two values is smaller .
the particular expectations of literacy confirm values associated with its characteristics .
these are optimum values for minimizing decompression and helium cost .
this means to express the values which african rulers should embrace in their leadership .
the values given are less than are generally used for small pictures and more than are generally used for large pictures .
the values of this ratio for different values of b , as given by fleming ( _phil .
167 embodies in chart form the values of this relationship for all times of the year and day , while fig .
the tchlca used in the year 2000 study of 5 ma was also lower than values used in the most recent studies .
it is important to monitor and follow the values for both copper and zinc together during zinc therapy , because these two trace elements are both antagonists in function , and essential for living cells .
as the side walls and furniture are to be regarded as unobtrusive settings for pictures and people it is well to be very conservative with the use of values .
[ 4 ] for she , 'la foule , ' the multitude , is the great transposer of values in our day .
there are , in the strict sense , no permanent values .
a similar method may be pursued in connection with the nutritive values of food , the theme developing from lesson to lesson , until the pupils are ready for the chapter on menus and dietaries .
the organization 's culture emphasizes the values of leadership , diversity and community service .
h ( = b - 4 [ pi ] i ) was calculated from corresponding values of i and b. taylor jones ( _wied .
in both , the services exchanged may be equal in the aggregate , and may consequently represent equal values , or equal relative wealth , but not the same absolute wealth .
for have i not learned the scientific and common names of most of our trees and shrubs , their habits , and their values , their uses in the arts and sciences , their medicinal qualities !
yet , in speaking of the social point of view , i must not be taken to mean that either the author or the spectator of the comic scene is seriously judging of the behaviour of its figures by a reference to social values .
while they share the same values , they can differ on opinion on subjects .
although everyone has reason to cultivate courage , temperance and prudence , whatever the person desires or values , still , the rationality of just and benevolent acts must , she thought , turn on contingent motivations .
many of the letters resemble the latin letters they derive from , but have completely different sound values ; sequoyah had seen english , hebrew , and greek writing but did not know how to read them .
the membrane model is for a small section of the cell membrane ; for larger sections it can be extended by adding similar sections , called compartments , with the parameter values being the same or different .
the old roman values had fallen , and mithraism and christianity had begun to spread through the populace .
the wikipedia community has very different values from many of the other popular discussion websites .
and the prospect of life in delafield began to take on new values .
i use test-weights that mount in a series of `` just perceptible differences '' to an imaginary person of extreme delicacy of perception , their values being calculated according to weber 's law .
and so with the values of the machines .
the two values approximating to 0″.25 seem open to little doubt .
like these traditional public fora , internet access in public libraries uniquely promotes first amendment values , by offering low barriers to entry to speakers and listeners .
recombination and contamination of the junction tend to be greatest at the perimeter of the cell , so very small cells may exhibit higher values of j0 or lower values of rsh than larger cells that are otherwise identical .
acceptable values for service parameters may be negotiated .
it must be taken into consideration here that czechoslovakia ’ s defence measures will increase in strength from year to year , and that a consolidation of the inside values of the austrian army will also be effected in the course of years .
the nations were coming to their own in the midst of a more complex social life full of human interests and values .
there was something he might call the factuarial estimate of values .
such relationship may take the form of a graph , where numerical values of a circuit variable are plotted versus frequency or component value ( the most common example would be a plot of the magnitude of a transfer function vs .
others also suggest that the higher rates of school attendance among asian children may result from cultural values that prioritize education .
the iterates x _ n of the secant method converge to a root of f , if the initial values x _ 0 and x _ 1 are sufficiently close to the root .
the values and attitudes which underlie modern design schools differ among the different design schools .
of course there are some few articles missing of modern manufacture , but what my master values at millions is here .
popular values of attenuator are 3db , 6db , 10db , 20db and 40db .
accumulator ( now that both input values are stored in mailboxes 08 and 09 .
ethics and sustainability are the core values of the business .
turner defines it as a conflict caused by " differences in cultural values and beliefs that place people at odds with one another " .
however in mono-vision , such as that of photographs , the elimination of our depth perception causes multistable perception to take over , and this can cause the craters to inverse their depth values and instead look like plateaus rather than pits .
pop and i 've gotten so down in the dumps trying to work the thing out that we 've lost our sense of values . ''
as no person has as yet come forward with any figures to show which combination is easier to get in patience poker , nor the proportion of one hand to the other , these figures are all guess work ; and players may adopt any values they please .
the default seed is 17 and can be set to any other integer value ( used to generate distinct values on the same page ) .
if this occurs , the decoder needs to clip the output values keep them within that range to prevent overflow when storing the decompressed image with the original bit depth .
for his admirers , dacre has maintained his newspaper 's defence of family values and the ' small-c ' conservative interests of the suburban middle-classes in the south of england .
this was recently done by a countryside , at the instigation of the minister , and the effect of it was lasting in its values as well as intense in the joy of the day 's work .
the most widely used method of discounting is exponential discounting , which values future cash flows as " how much money would have to be invested currently , at a given rate of return , to yield the cash flow in future .
it will be seen , however , that agricola 's cakes greatly exceed these values .
it is a story of a respected scholar , srinivasa srotri , his family and their long held values .
severity values are divided between success ( success , informational ) and failure ( warning , error , fatal ) .
since the values of _a_ , _b_ , and _c_ are known , _x_ is readily computed .
the great disturbance in values caused by the war , and the vast demand for grain and forage for the army , have reduced this disproportion in prices very much for the time , but it may be looked for again on the return of peace .
they did not believe that the values and life style of foreigners were equal to their own , and therefore they did not want to grant the outsiders the freedom to `` pollute '' american society with alien cultures .
to facilitate the process the owi 's bureau of motion pictures ( bmp ) worked with producers , directors and writers before the shooting started to make sure that the themes reflected patriotic values .
but by about 1883 he found he “ had wrung impressionism dry. ” he regretted the loss of form , composition , and human values in the shimmering impressionist pictures .
[ 1615 ] effect on property values the misrule of the radicals in alabama resulted in a general shrinkage in values after 1867 , especially in the black belt , where financial and economic chaos reigned supreme , and where the carpet-bagger flourished supported by the negro votes .
no one may be awarded this honorary distinction , if they do not present all the values of morality and integrity need for the award .
with knowledge of food values an expensive dietary may be wholesome , but there is great temptation to overeating and waste of food , and it is wise to keep meals simple for the sake of good digestion .
in statistics and regression analysis , an independent variable that can take on only two possible values is called a dummy variable .
i have two ( or more ) values .
this is not to say however , that following them to the letter will avoid you severely depressing your local real estate values and getting the neighbours grumpy .
steve huey of allmusic wrote that the duo " evokes the sound and spirit of southern rockers like lynyrd skynyrd , the marshall tucker band , and charlie daniels , painting themselves as rowdy redneck rebels who still hold small-town values .
in layman 's terms , it takes n-digit binary values as input and produces either a 0 or a 1 as output for each such value .
the racial mind , long accustomed to attach moral values to personal acts only , can not , without definite effort , learn to attach them to collective acts .
we see the lord 's tenderness and love and care for the little child ; we see how he values the childlike qualities ; and how he enjoins the nursing and the cherishing of these .
per capita values are based on population estimates from the census bureau for july 1 , 2011 .
this template calculates an annual percentage rate ( apr ) from two values some time apart .
the trouble with comparisons like this is that it essentially requires a moral calculus - that is , a system of assigning a value to an event , and then comparing a number of such values to arrive at some outcome .
education should change a spiritual essence of a human , that is why communion with humanistic values means more than race and religion .
the economist ( april 2005 ) : '' an imf study on asset bubbles estimates that 40 % of housing booms are followed by housing busts , which last for an average of four years and see an average decline of roughly 30 % in home values .
she was just an extraordinarily alert woman , mentally and physically , with a shrewd sense of values .
supporters of the measure felt that their traditional values were under siege in the face of growing acceptance of homosexuality by society .
the villagers who used to tell my bairns that i was daft do n't realise what pose is ; they have never found the right values .
inter-relations and associations with other subjects of study and various phases of life are affected , which give to it distinct values .
ld values for humans are best estimated by extrapolating results from human cell cultures .
`` =food values : practical methods in dietetics= , '' 32 pp. , ill. , _10 cents_ .
in composition the fresco is very fine , the values of distance are well kept , and the meaning of the scene is obvious and significant , and dramatically rendered .
god and eternal truths or values .
tpms cannot measure or display absolute pressure values , they are relative by nature and have to be reset by the driver once the tires are checked and all pressures adjusted correctly .
light , the play of complementaries , the breaking up of light , the study of values ! -- little things please little minds !
van tromp has something about him at once positive and elusive ; he is full of planes and values , and he interprets and renders , and the rest of it .
the first impulse of the imagination is always to combine in the object all the elements which lie together in the mind , to project them indiscriminately into a single conception of reality , enriched with as many qualities as there are phases and values in our experience .
although overcoming complex analytical operations the posterior probability still involves a summation over all trees and , for each tree , integration over all possible combinations of substitution model parameter values and branch lengths .
i think showing a new coi editor that while coi editing may cause problems , wikipedia still values them and their contributions .
the former waste products of many an industry have also revealed unsuspected values , and chemistry has the sole honor of their discovery .
link references , categories and other values are only computed when an article is saved ( ie the parser processed the page ) .
philosophical study of universal value addresses questions such as the meaningfulness of universal value or whether universal values exist .
we can also look at the growth of large-scale structure , and find that the observed values of the cosmological parameters are best described by models which include an accelerating expansion .
they have become habituated to examining the new from every conceivable viewpoint , to finding its foundations , to testing its values , and to weighing its effects .
[ 25 ] eucken maintains that the insufficient attention paid to this priority of the subject is the [ p.89 ] defect of all the systems which have reduced life and all its values to their lowest denominator .
but he understood the situation and comparative values correctly .
barrett , clifford l. ethics ; an introduction to the philosophy of moral values .
in fact , an enum type in java is actually a special compiler-generated class rather than an arithmetic type , and enum values behave as global pre-generated instances of that class .
estimated in silver or expressed in silver prices exchange values are naturally estimated quite differently than when measured in gold or as gold prices .
as james showed , the distinction between 'dreams ' and 'realities , ' between 'things ' and 'illusions , ' results only from the differential values we attach to the parts of the flux according as they seem important or interesting to us or not .
unit iii salesmanship applied how to demonstrate values contrast in buying methods of women and men enriching your vocabulary hidden factors that increase sales [ illustration : courtesy of merchandise mart news bureau .
when the larger values tend to be farther away from the mean than the smaller values , one has a skew distribution to the right ( i .
the same formula works for all right-angled triangles if you plug in the right values for " a " and " b " .
`` we have strict instructions on that point , and there 's not a man aboard this ship who values his life so little as to dream of disobeying .
she possessed , among her other natural gifts , a keen judgment of news values .
[ 262 ] in calculating these values we have assumed the quintal to be equivalent to 100 pounds , the bahar = 460 pounds , the ratel = 1 pound .
our core values and policies require you to treat everyone acceptably well here .
he had no confidence in his own knowledge of values , and liked to watch the course of competition .
he also blends his own thoughts and feelings with his impressions of nature , making it clear that he values her not merely for decoration , but for her own sake .
i said to the man : '' truly you come here into the forest bringing with you life and the world and intellectual values and news .
this is used in narrowing by exclusion of dependent values .
usually , the summer nights are cool and pleasant , with values between to .
how very kind of you ! ” “ surely something could be done. ” “ no ; values have risen too enormously .
the sum total of the values of a society is its culture .
unrestricted however , the boolean datatype , despite its name , can hold the truth values true , false , and unknown , all of which are defined as boolean literals according to the standard .
[ 123 ] yet this was the birthday festival of nothing less than what the world now values as italian painting .
lower near end crosstalk values correspond to higher overall circuit performance .
yonge is herself sometimes referred to as " the novelist of the oxford movement " , as her novels frequently reflect the values and concerns of anglo-catholicism .
in this view , eustacia dies because she has internalised the community 's values to the extent that , unable to escape egdon without confirming her status as a fallen woman , she chooses suicide .
we need a system that values learning and growth over time , in addition to helping students reach high standards .
when we talk about values we may use the word in two senses .
the process of attempting to give -- or discover -- moral values is a process of mutual determination of object and agent .
but it makes the story , because it is an organized experience marked by the values of human life , the unity of the child 's return or reaction to his environment .
investigation of general formulas for obtaining the values of the unknown quantities in a system of equations of the first degree with two or three unknown quantities. -- method of bezout. -- complete discussion of these formulas for the case of two unknown quantities. -- symbols m/o and o/o .
and , in subtler ways , through the social prestige which their mere wealth too often gives , through the ideals which they themselves honestly feel , and communicate to those about them , do they create values opposing the values making for a juster distribution of wealth .
when the form ( 19 ) is given , the values of the velocities in terms of the momenta can be expressed in a remarkable form due to sir w.r. hamilton .
the philosopher-poet will find reality as a whole to be something that accredits the order of values in his inner life .
this is not middle america with its conservative christian values .
the movement focuses on defending , protecting , and promoting values , rights , and interests of kongo people in the democratic republic of the congo .
loss of natural habitat can occur through introduction of forest monoculture or by even aged timber management , which are also destructive of biodiversity forests that have been managed for even aged composition fail to achieve abundance values of the wild turkey and many other organisms .
perpetually incomplete , always on the fringe of things , he compels others to create him , while denying their values .
in 1870 a new assessment was made , which added over £112,000 to the rateable values , the returns for 1874 amounting to £1,254,911 , an increase in the ten years of £272,527 .
nevertheless , a man who has given to an art in two dimensions the illusion of a third ; tactile values are here raised to the _n_th degree .
this hypothesis argues that when people have to make complex uncertain decisions , they employ both cognitive and emotional processes to assess the values of the choices available to them .
the answer " reminds house that since he values reason above everything else , there must be one for her presence in his mind .
people have rational preferences between outcomes that can be identified and associated with values .
when death comes near enough for us to see it face to face , we have a better appreciation of values , and find things strangely altered .
brown , _a determination of the relative values of gravity at potsdam and washington_ ( special publication no .
located at 125 oakland avenue , it seeks to provide a foundation of academic excellence and islamic values that enables young muslims to become righteous leaders for the community .
seldom have human emotions and values been more convincingly interpreted .
therefore , if one of these two values were to be discovered , the other could easily be calculated .
the commercial and urban values of quick wit , sophistication , and intelligence are treasured , while the vices of stupidity and dullness are cured , or punished .
the only valid values are the ones listed in the enumeration .
the practical resistor values available in 1963 were limited to the range of 300 to 1000 ohms ; resistors outside of this range carried a hefty price penalty - lojek , pp .
`` i have yet to taste a supper which ching values at a thousand pounds of our grievously depreciated currency .
a stochastic process has the markov property if the conditional probability distribution of future states of the process ( conditional on both past and present values ) depends only upon the present state ; that is , given the present , the future does not depend on the past .
he must be one who comprehends that three years of war have made vast changes in the relative values of things .
garat maintains a purely anarchistic position , revolting against the mainstream norm of " shock values of comtemporary art " .
not so many years ago the teaching profession was known as `` the refuge of the destitute , '' but we are changing all that with the revaluation of values which is being forced upon us by the logic of events .
in all cases of auditory fatigue , sufficient recovery time should allow full correction of the hearing impairment and return threshold levels to their baseline values .
but a big splash on earth would boost viking 's prestige tremendously , with a possible rise in stock values which would take some of the shakiness out of viking .
_e_ if , for the same ray , the deflection , δ , and the radius of curvature , ρ , be measured in a magnetic field , values could be found from these two experiments for the ratio _e_/_m_ and for the velocity , _v_ .
long-time friend sir chandrasekhara venkata raman said that " sir mirza 's accessibility and personal charm coupled with his depth of knowledge and his keen sense of human and cultural values made him a great and highly successful administrator " .
having obtained these , he next analyzed each and ascertained the phonetic values of the several characters of which they are composed .
the kettle is simple in form , of pleasing proportions , and shows a good contrast of light and dark values .
even when a new period of socialization shall have simplified life , each individual must still be considered separately , each personality approached with utmost reverence , accepted for values and possibilities which when developed displace asocial behavior .
the values of these are all given in the lunar tables ; and in finding the moon 's place , at any given time , we proceed as follows : we first find what her place would be on the supposition that she moves uniformly in a circle .
i have plugged in the prime values for x and y , and substituted 108 .
the eye as well as the ear learns what to expect , with results proportioned to the comparative values of those two senses as avenues of knowledge .
it implies a subsequent contribution , from all the parties concerned , rateably to the values of their respective interests , to make good the loss thus occasioned .
instead of adapting to the mainstream values and expectations of u .
co-existent , however , with these fiars , which were termed sheriffs ' fiars , there was at an early period another class called commissaries ' fiars , by which the values of teinds were regulated .
the properties listed here are those for which values are known reliably .
a summed area table is a data structure and algorithm for quickly and efficiently generating the sum of values in a rectangular subset of a grid .
closer approximations can be produced by using larger values of .
the hindu temple architecture reflects a synthesis of arts , the ideals of dharma , beliefs , values and the way of life cherished under hinduism .
these stamps , however , never materialised though that dies and plates were made and stamps printed from them is evident from the existence of perforated essays of these two values .
from the eirp , and with knowledge of a real antenna 's gain , it is possible to calculate real power and field strength values .
mir iskusstva " identified with the artistic values of the [ russian ] aristocracy " in its cosmopolitanism and belief of a universal culture .
data on extreme values of certain parameters and days of a month with certain parameters exceeding defined thresholds can also be included , as well as information on the number of days of a month where data are missing for a certain parameter .
by taking up again here the thread that was dropped before , we can now clearly see why it is precisely in the neurosis that those values which are most lacking to the individual lie hidden .
there is no `` standard or common measure '' of legal values .
the magnet uri standard has been elablorated into an format to carry encryption values .
substituting these values for _a_ and _p_ in the formula , together with the length of stroke and average number of revolutions per minute , the indicated horsepower is easily computed .
traditionally , only ppp-converted gdp values had been reported .
the most complicated part is determining if the values are positive or negative .
here two scales represent known values and the third is the scale where the result is read off .
finds k-interchangeable values in a csp .
stripped of its academic decorations and its elaborate balancing of values , this was a reforming tract of the first importance .
to make sense of all his data , he hit upon the idea of interpolating a series of lines at set intervals between his measure values , marking points of equal height .
the first is that the accepted idea of the american nation as one that weighs and measures all conduct by material values in dollars and cents , must henceforth be banished forever .
for example , it may represent an exponential function when its values are expressed in the logarithmic scale .
in the cut flower industry , which values its silvery foliage , the common names smoke bush and australian smoke bush have also been used .
its main databases are about world problems ( 56,564 profiles ) , global strategies and solutions ( 32,547 profiles ) , human values ( 3,257 profiles ) , and human development ( 4,817 profiles ) .
additionally , pan-africanism is seen as an endeavour to return to what are deemed by its proponents singular , traditional african concepts about culture , society , and values .
these images can then be reconstructed into a 3d matrix of intensity values representing the volume .
rabbi jerome folkman believed in spreading jewish values to the community " , the new standard , february 29 , 2004 .
these models may differ in the number and values of the predictor variables as well as in their priors on the model parameters .
remarkably , this crude model resulted in the same trend in relative interaction energies , and correlated strongly with the values calculated for ph-x .
this source seems to give a different frame of values .
for its sincerity in the portrayal of basic human values that unify mankind .
the impending general issue will be required as soon as the existing stock of the current issue is exhausted , and it is rumored that the supply of some values is running low .
using the same values of resistance in the transmitter and line , assume the local circuit apart from the transmitter to have a fixed resistance of 5 ohms .
more than this , a knowledge of bird ways , habits , methods of feeding and caring for their nests and young , their songs and calls , `` their manners for the heart 's delight , '' are great æsthetic and educational values .
some posit that the ease of achieving the american dream changes with technological advances , availability of infrastructure and information , government regulations , state of the economy , and with the evolving cultural values of american demographics .
the number of unique ( distinct ) non-zero values within an n-by-n euclidean distance matrix is bounded above by due to the matrix being symmetric and hollow .
we can no longer doubt man 's capacity of aspiring to values far beyond external possessions ; and his inner life , the development of his own individual personality may become a matter of paramount importance to him .
that just means that you need to find the vertex , so plug in the x and y values and solve for a .
differences in meanings and values , referred to above in terms of the '' apperception mass , '' grow out of the fact that different individuals and different peoples have defined the situation in different ways .
the cigar business shows practically no change , in that time , as far as values are concerned .
the stock exchange has come into existence because of a demand for trade facilities that will adjust differences of opinion in reference to future values of corporation securities and give the purchaser some idea of values .
the vast majority of needed uses of this template are cases where has values , possibly including en , inserted for xx automatically by software tools such as templates and bots .
need we be surprised at this , we who have a more than scientific sense of values and have discovered purpose ?
when the stock market collapsed and values had depreciated hundreds of millions , money was found by the large insurance companies and the powerful factors of wall street to pick up the bargains in shares , but it was some time before merchants could get it .
because energy at rest does not spontaneously pass into conditions in which it can do work , the efficiencies of the machines must have definite and unchangeable values .
it was curious , wonderful , and above all it revolutionized old values .
it was a fine sense of artistic values that cut out the speeches and dismissed the school in the ordinary way .
this observation led him to begin questioning how a completely loving god could possibly sentence non-christians who clearly espouse values that are revered in christianity to an eternity in hell .
echo bay mines limited is a canadian the company leased the old port radium settlement from eldorado mining and refining limited and used the old camp and mill to recover silver and copper values from what became known as the echo bay mine .
our ideas of values with regard to occupations are altogether erroneous , from the `` inner wisdom '' point of view .
rapidly rising real estate values in the nearby east side neighborhoods have made riverwest more attractive to home buyers due to its closeness to downtown and the university .
the foundation is committed to supporting projects that help the policy community face the fundamental challenge of ensuring the security of the united states , protecting and promoting american interests and values abroad , and enhancing international order .
the total of all calculated values is the technical factor ( tf ) .
[ sidenote : rent and time-value are essentially different phrases of the value problem ] time-value is here understood to be that all-pervading difference in the values of uses and gratifications of wealth at different points of time .
to do this , we have only to take each section in turn , and , without disturbing the values already assorted , shove the grayest in toward the narrow edge , and grade outward to the purest on the surface .
unless there is , quite generally , a saner perspective in the social mind and until values are reëstimated , the solution of the rural school problem and indeed of many problems of rural life is well-nigh hopeless .
farming pays in proportion to the amount of work intelligently applied to this manner of increasing values .
reflection on values is the method of their modification .
it is to tie us helplessly to the chariot wheels of an industrial juggernaut which knows nothing of moral values .
i thought i knew something about commercial values , but i see i can learn . ''
_nutritional values in crops and plants .
he attacked the show as " filth that contradicts his moral values " and said that he was sick of being a part of it .
i can see how much religion deepened their insight and steadied their judgement , and saved them from coarse materialism in their judgement of economic values .
life is at least the raw material of all values , even if it is not in itself entitled to be called good without qualification .
according to haigh " gunship is a neon soaked , late night , sonic getaway drive , dripping with luscious analog synthesizers , cinematic vocals and cyberpunk values , exploding from the front cover of a dusty plastic vhs case which has lain forgotten since 1984 .
my mother values it so much that in order to retain its freshness she keeps it locked up and shows it only to those who she knows will appreciate its exquisite qualities .
a hundred up is the usual score , and occasionally different values are given to coloured balls , so that a black counts double , a red the same , or adds two to the score otherwise made .
seldm is a stochastic model because it uses monte carlo methods to produce the random combinations of input variable values needed to generate the stochastic population of values for each component variable .
organisms differ in their values of thermal hysteresis .
habitat values and endemicty in the vanishing rain forests of sri lanka , nature .
by giving special values to the elements of the determinant of the matrix .
the values chosen are not revealed to either contestant upon selection .
gdp implies that the company 's cash flow will outpace and eventually absorb these rather large values .
through official patronage and censorship , celebration and loathing , affirmation and critique of prevailing values , art has long been imbricated and implicated in the political .
as well as stimulating in the state 's population the rediscovery of historical , linguistic and ethnic values of the yaquis .
errol would not compromise his values and beliefs for a record deal and so he decided to pursue his music in his own way .
the manitoba schools question showed the deep divergence of cultural values in the territory .
the recognized values of social judgment !
the article seems to have a fair amount of content , but little of encyclopedic values , such as , for example , his birth year .
gtia contain hardware registers that set the values used for colors , and the pixels ' information refer to these registers .
=value of manure.= -- dr. beal figures the values per ton of the several farm-made manures as follows : hen manure , $ 7.07 ; sheep , $ 3.30 ; pigs , $ 3.29 ; horses , $ 2.21 ; cows , $ 2.02 .
such plans will endure -- and they will be far the most profitable both in human and financial values .
the five traditional carpet motifs in emblem of turkmenistan on the red disc represent the five major tribes or houses , and stand for the traditional and religious values of the country .
the figures under heading i. are values given in a paper by a.w.s .
between such non-competing groups the norm that determines values is not the unmitigated norm of cost of production taken absolutely , but only taken relatively .
the fundamental factors in the educative process are an immature , undeveloped being ; and certain social aims , meanings , values incarnate in the matured experience of the adult .
that is one of the chief values of a good education .
it also mentions that δgop , n values cover the range from 0 .
during the prewar period , the introduction of western cultural values led to a dichotomy in japanese art , as well as in nearly every other aspect of culture , between traditional values and attempts to duplicate and assimilate a variety of clashing new ideas .
the formula has been extended for use with all values of _c_ , _i_ , _s_ , and _a_ ordinarily met in sewerage practice .
in enumerating the values of nature and casting up their sum , i shall use the word in both senses ; -- in its common and in its philosophical import .
u denotes the set of all possible values of u under consideration .
catholic values prompts the school to " create an environment that develops personal integrity , respect for one another , reverence for god , and stewardship for our world .
he profoundly values the warm sentiments you have expressed , and fully reciprocates your greetings and good wishes .
radical feminists feel that there is a male-based authority and power structure and that it is responsible for oppression and inequality , and that , as long as the system and its values are in place , society will not be able to be reformed in any significant way .
cpi values - for all values in wikipedia - and the world really .
naturally and understandably , they deeply resent the attack on their values implicit in using the word `` hacker '' as a synonym for computer-criminal .
for different straight lines , m and b may have any constant values we like .
the range of units used to specify capacitor values has expanded to include everything from pico- ( pf ) , nano- ( nf ) and microfarad ( µf ) to farad ( f ) .
“ i suppose he values that medal very highly .
hence have arisen discussions on '' international values '' which will be one day remembered as highly curious exercises of the human mind .
a state encompasses all the properties of the object along with the values of each of these properties .
and there emerges this indictment : -- as the theory has a vital bearing on the relative values of different strata of tradition , mr. robertson can not afford to ignore it .
the julio-claudians started the destruction of republican values , but on the other hand , they boosted rome 's status as the central power in the world .
but things took a turn ; slackness , then actual depression in real estate values set in , and oh !
because an alcohol ( which acts as the leaving group ) and water ( which acts as the nucleophile ) have similar pka values , the forward and reverse reactions compete with each other .
it enables planners to make decisions that reflect community needs and values , it fosters faith in the wisdom and utility of the resulting project , and the community is given a personal stake in its success .
`` good decisions come from good values , '' continued the old woman , as she watched her knitting rather than the girl .
the hillegas scale , together with the values assigned to each of the samples , is given below .
hence multiplication of his values for capacities by 2.54 reduces them to e.s .
of these five factors , all but the last ( the consequences as to costs ) have by this time , in the course of the estimate , been assigned values as definite as the commander 's information and his study permit .
canadian silver coins are 925 parts fine , and have a slightly less amount of fine silver than united states of america silver coins of similar circulating values .
all circumstances at the respective dates considered , the values received for the tracts surrendered as thus duly enumerated may , by possibility , have been reasonable .
lessing was about peter 's own age and had large and cheerful notions of the probable increase of real-estate values in pleasanton , combined with a just appreciation of the simple shrewdness which had so recommended peter to his employers .
and to what is the difference between these two values due ?
as they bore values in centimes , they were withdrawn as soon as `` groschens '' and '' kreuzers '' became generally current .
so long as the values and loyalty persist , trust and commitment will be maintained .
an account of these and a very careful tabulation of the average values of the coefficients will be found in the _hydraulics_ of the late hamilton smith ( wiley & sons , new york , 1886 ) .
additional oil recovered ( aor ) values are shown in table 2 .
when the product is small , the fresnel ripples are very much in evidence , but the spectrum does tend to a more rectangular profile for larger values .
our ultimate strength lies , not alone in arms , but in the sense of moral values and moral truths that give meaning and vitality to the purposes of free people .
it is the division of an engineer rather than of an economist ; for these so-called non-physical values are like the breath of a man 's life ; without them , the physical value is like the discarded body .
he dearly values his friends and the truth .
the pound column is then processed , but as pounds are the largest unit that is being considered , no values are carried forward from the pounds column .
philosophic systems are concerned with human values , not with skills or abilities involved in reaching goals defined by our rationality .
i have always done a good deal of writing myself , but i can ’ t do without help , and as i want you to understand the accounts and get the values into your head , i mean to do without another clerk .
for instance , early processors did not natively support the ieee floating point standard for representing fractional values , so integers were used to store representations of the real world values by applying a scale factor to the real value .
to enhance the well-being of the jewish people and israel , and to advance jewish rights and jewish values in the united states and around the world .
yet this impossibility of comparison of these qualities could not exist along with the unity of their substratum , if the physical and psychical values were not joined together in this substratum .
the values of an observable will be obtained non-deterministically in accordance with a probability distribution which is uniquely determined by the system state .
sexuality was subjected to the experience of accepted rules-the do 's and don'ts appropriate to expectations of efficiency , and their resulting values , corresponding to the scale of humankind and the natural condition .
incidentally the value of money fills the important function of serving as a measure of the values of goods transferred without the direct use of money , both immediate and deferred .
the 1982 congress confirmed its democratic agenda , declaring the pcb " a party of the masses , linking socialist goals to true democracy , which will be constructed based on the values of freedom " .
imm values from the next shorter context .
_maṇ_ ) , which , with varying values , has been current over western asia from time immemorial .
one company included them in their " intel values , " cited by employees as reasons why they didn 't need a union .
erin , a loner and something of a freak in a society which values perfection , wants more out of life and spends his time secretly working on his passion , a time-traveling machine like the one built thousands of years ago by the legendary joc-sindor .
although there is no guarantee that these algorithms succeed in all of the cases but we can guarantee that if some of the variable nodes become verified during these algorithms then the values of those variable nodes are correct almost surely .
as the formulation of the concept is different from the one that ashrae uses , these met values cannot be used directly in pmv calculations , but it opens up a new way of quantifying physical activities .
another cause was the raising of rating values by the local authorities , of whom those having jurisdiction in suburban or country areas were endowed with £2 from the treasury for every £1 raised by rates .
this is often not precisely known and hence the values should not be considered exact .
divisions of the escudo are of silver , with values of 50 , 20 , and 10 centavos ; subsidiary coins consist of bronze and nickel pieces .
jurisprudence of values focuses on achieving the ideals underlying these legal principles .
but enormous quantities of ore have been destroyed by the processes of war , and south american iron may come to high values sooner than its owners have supposed .
the bank of england had been thus saved at a great financial crisis , when its reserve in cash and bullion had shrunk to little more than a million , and it had issued notes for values of less than five pounds .
amid all the mobile and unstable elements in space , 'mean numerical values ' are the ultimate aim of investigation , being the expression of the physical laws , or forces of the cosmos .
calibration should be performed with at least two standard buffer solutions that span the range of ph values to be measured .
typical values for n are 5 , 9 , or 14 periods .
this means that the standard which is set by the differing values of the goods at a and at b may or may not yield a profit to the railroad .
the original form of the duality applies to black holes with the maximum value of angular momentum , but it has now been speculatively extended to all lesser values .
although popular with the public , dryden 's play was attacked by jeremy collier in his 1698 pamphlet entitled " a short view of the immortality of the stage " for undermining social mores and attacking the political values of his day .
this , like all other values , is of course determined by the relation between demand and supply .
method of calculating the cost of a fabric from given data of values of material and labour , by ascertaining the fibre , counts , ends , picks and weight .
there was a pause , and ram buksh got himself fearfully entangled among boards and committees , but he valued them as a bower-bird values shells and red rags .
augustus pugin compared kempthorne 's hexagonal plan with the " antient poor hoyse " , in what professor felix driver calls a " romantic , conservative critique " of the " degeneration of english moral and aesthetic values " .
movies for the millions " the success of the jolly fellows ensured a place in soviet cinema for the musical format , but immediately shumyatsky set up strict guidelines to make sure the films promoted communist values .
but as our ideas of human relations and of values have changed , science has given us new methods for attaining the final goals that we set ourselves .
in languages that support named optional parameters , however , the programmer may supply any subset of the available parameters , and the names are used to determine which values have been provided .
wikipedia seeks to be neutral and values editors who set aside personal creeds when they contribute .
intermediate values are used for economies in transition between stages .
hmm , i accidentally divided the α values by three to get the β values instead of multiplying them .
the results are otherwise correct so far as regnault 's data are accurate , because the values of the efficiency per degree f´t are not affected by any assumption with regard to the nature of heat .
asian values gained popularity in the people 's republic of china , malaysia ( under mahathir mohamad ) , singapore ( under lee kuan yew ) , indonesia and in japan ( perhaps as early as the pre world war ii era ) .
2 ) if he values the good-will of the town itself , he shall pay us thirty shillings as compensation , if the king will grant us this concession . ''
it is also the purpose of the school to induce in each student good health as well as the inspiration of good moral and ethical values .
secure in my values , cancer itself could not crush or debilitate my inner self ; it clarified myself , bringing forth both fortitude and frailty , defining my character ; i was who i always had been , emotionally enlarged and with a keener sense of awareness .
these fine gentlemen think that a lady 's heart can never be won rightly without bribing her maid ; and therefore , just in proportion to the number of crowns you have received , i shall judge that monsieur de chazeul values my love .
he replaced the party 's social conservative stance , replacing it with a social liberal value system while still keeping fiscal conservative values .
so that a recital of history with an eye to its dramatic values is possible only when that history is , so to speak , our own , or when we assimilate it to ours by poetic license .
eugenio bianchi is an italian theoretical physicist and a banting postdoctoral fellow for all values of the immirzi parameter .
two is only one and one , and three only two and one ; and thus with all numerical values .
cards rank as in whist and have certain numerical values called pips as shown in the table .
the values given in the table are not exact , as the coal from each locality varies considerably in quality , but the figures will indicate what may be expected from each type of coal .
[ pi ] \2 l 3 l 5 l / for unrestricted values of x , this series represents the ordinates of the series of straight lines in fig .
it is indeed quite possible to work either system with '' long '' and `` short , '' applied uncontentiously to the natural values of rhythmed speech in english poetry .
in the first place breeders will be assured of markets for all the pigs produced , and , secondly , the differences in values of prime baconers will direct more attention to the greater profits for this class of produce .
there was no debate as to whether the life of a financier , a master of business , was rated higher in the scale of values than that of an ignorant peasant mother .
a set of values and practices which plays a special role in overcoming poverty and disadvantage , knitting society together at the grass roots and deepening democracy .
the king is just , and he values the services of your father .
the cycle coefficient in a3 , except for its very unusual headdress , is almost identical with the other two head-variant numerals , whose values are known to be 12 .
so he started down into the pit and pulled the strings until his puppets danced to their hearts ’ content. ” frances nodded her appreciation of the scene ’ s dramatic values , and waited for durkin to continue .
bulletins : free-hand cooking , ten-cent meals , food values , family finance , art of spending , weekly allowance book , _10c .
ethics , strengths and values , journal of librarianship and information science , vol .
actualities , objects , events , and forms which to the idealist are precious if only partial expressions of spiritual values , are to him wholly recalcitrant , wholly external and illusory .
[ 7 ] several of the roman letters had in britain developed forms , and retained or acquired values , unlike those used on the continent , in particular [ glyphs ] ( d f g r s t ) .
lumber values were mounting every day .
derived from molar values by multiplying with the molar mass of 113 .
it is not possible to increase the resolution of the basic dual-slope adc to arbitrarily high values by using longer measurement times or faster clocks .
the silva family was instrumental in upholding the traditional values of the corps .
during my stay a record in land values was made by the sale of a site on hastings street at $ 7,500 per foot frontage .
with these values red and green will be to bright .
first , we have effort—then a voluntary exchange of efforts or services—then a comparative appreciation of those services , or value ; lastly , the right of each to enjoy the utilities attached to these values , or property .
2 ) the same holds for words of the following type where there have been further orthographical changes with preserve , however , the same phonetic values .
it is not in itself a religion , new or otherwise , but a psychological philosophy and framework , including a set of values that have made it one of the most significant and influential forces in modern western society .
wondering if anyone has a link to an image of such a graph , ( just real values obviously ) just to satisfy my curiousity .
the only difference is that the posterior predictive distribution uses the updated values of the hyperparameters ( applying the bayesian update rules given in the conjugate prior article ) , while the prior predictive distribution uses the values of the hyperparameters that appear in the prior distribution .
a mere soldier little values the character of eloquence ; a gownman , of courage ; a bishop , of humour ; or a merchant , of learning .
but as the reduction is increased there is a proportionate risk in alteration of values .
religion must be concrete instead of formal , and catholic in its count of values .
sum up all the values of all the pleasures on the one side , and those of all the pains on the other .
tero saarinen companysaarinen wanted to work on a more permanent basis with inspired artists who shared his values .
this change is connected with the new axiom that functions can occur in propositions only " through their values " , i .
the circulating medium , or measure of values , being doubled , the price of commodities was doubled .
it is not actually necessary to go as far as the swedish writer , m. bjerre , who finds in nietzsche 's deliberate and revolutionary transvaluation of values that break up of the cerebral system from its previous condition which signalises the earlier stages of general paralysis .
support for up to 4 weighting values per vertex .
this applies to all owners , so that the allowance for compulsory sale would only artificially depreciate by one-fourth all the rateable values put down in the magistrate 's book .
and despite the pressures of our modern world , family and community remain the moral core of our society , guardians of our values and hopes for the future .
c3 ee 73 3d 7c 2e 83 d2 20 74 d8 5e 06 95 ed 65 39 68 5e 2e bb 01 00according to tag length values , this can be decoded as below .
i can learn their names and values only , while you put them all to so many good uses , '' i answered .
the standard norms ( i forget the names ) are the square root of the sum of the squares of the absolute values of the components , the sum of the absolute values of the components , and the maximum of the absolute values of the components .
one day in every week the children are taught religious values over there .
“ harry mayne ’ s house ” , from nature , five values , ipswich summer school of art ] [ no .
in any case pragmatism attributes to nature a certain dependence on will , and therefore implies , even when it does not avow , that will with its peculiar principles or values can not be reduced to the terms of nature .
gli works to serve as a training ground and think tank , providing students and professionals with the requisite values and environment towards individual development .
the party particularly appealed to voters sympathetic towards traditional social values , the catholic faith , and the concept of polish national sovereignty .
all three have now been proven under mathematical rules to be impossible generally ( angles with certain values can be trisected , but not all possible angles ) .
in response to desecration of azerbaijani holy sanctuary agadede south of yerevan in 2005 , farida mammadova said " it is known , that on whole planet exactly the armenian people is distinguished by the absence of spiritual and other human values .
the artist , facing an audience which seems incapable of differentiating between æsthetic and ethical values , tends to become a preacher of sonorous nothings , and the actual moralist-propagandist finds his way into art well greased .
often it is unclear as to what the values a and b should be as it differs according to purpose .
by the introduction of minimums , or assumed and false values , and by the imposition of specific duties the injustice and inequality of the act of 1842 in its practical operations on different classes and pursuits are seen and felt .
his tabulated results have been studied for the air water interface , and in general the values he obtained reflect the theoretical refraction given by modern theory , but the outliers are distorted to represent ptolemy 's a priori model of the nature of refraction .
anyone who makes volk or state or form of state or state authorities or other basic values of the human shaping of society into the highest of all norms , even of religious values .
further , it is necessary in accordance with the principle of indemnity , if not to compensate citizens , at least to guarantee to them the values which they part with ; it is necessary , in short , to insure them against loss .
the soul now recognises a value beyond the values of culture and civilisation .
these values are also included below .
other critics noted on the important values embodied by the character 's process towards self-realization .
the reason why i suspect it is because i choose ( a long time ago ) on a ten day period to write down all the money values associated to each particular case on each day .
much unjust discrimination was made against cubans in determining assessable values and in collecting the taxes , and it is said that bribery in some form was the only effective defense against the most flagrant impositions . ''
she values money too highly . ''
hence the conjectures of different men are of extremely different values ; in the case of many they amount to what we call positive knowledge .
rgb values , with a histogram window that displays red , green , blue and luminance channel information .
racial prejudice other than that against negroes has operated in many instances to depress property values .
here , the output values are compared with the correct answer to compute the value of some predefined error-function .
apportioning the proper groups of signs among the sounds of these names , he obtained still further alphabetical values .
the 6 to 7 p.m. values were in general the smallest , especially in the case of a+ ; the evening value for q on the average exceeded the values from the two earlier hours by some 7 % .
{ fn41-7 } creative india by prof. benoy kumar sarkar gives a comprehensive picture of india 's ancient and modern achievements and distinctive values in economics , political science , literature , art , and social philosophy .
it is instructive from any point of view to study the quantities and relations of colour , and their tones and values , in such works .
usd ) , all damage totals are in 2008 values of their respective currencies unless otherwise noted .
withdrawals are taken out premiums first and then gains , so it is possible to take a tax-free withdrawal from the values of the policy ( this assumes the policy is not a mec , i .
then require of local correctional heads that they shall work loyally with their supreme , active chief , whether or no he rates values exactly as they rate them .
i am to him no more than a toy , and he values me no more than a child values a toy .
you may tell the showman that his six-legged sheep is an imposition , -- he does not care , he values his good name at nothing .
after briefly addressing the rise of secular values , dawkins goes on to discuss morality with the novelist ian mcewan .
the university is always ahead of prevailing social values .
studies that do not support linder have only counted countries that actually trade ; they do not input zero values for the dyads where trade could happen but does not .
despite his traditional values , he has been married to two other women .
these values of a and b will be sufficiently accurate for practical purposes for all pressures , and may be used in reference to low-pressure engines of every form , as well as for high-pressure engines which work expansively .
untouched by the principle of homage or of _noblesse oblige_ , he commanded , or was himself commanded , through the medium of material values .
by using orthochromatic plates relatively , true values or tone , and true texture can be rendered , and no translator steps in to add to , or subtract from , the originality of the work .
an old anglo saxon coin both of gold and silver , and of variously estimated values .
kenny 's time values had not altered .
history seems to have it that a contagious human hysteria recurs in cycles ; that the hysteria usually roots in an aimless spirit of unrest ; and that when the wheel of time points the fatal number , myriads of advanced humans yield their grip on intrinsic values .
pursuing nietzsche 's method as closely as we can , let us now turn to christianity , as we find it to-day , and see whether it is possible to bring its values into line with one of the two broad classes spoken of in this chapter .
the stripes symbolize the values of the fbi ; the red stripes stand for courage , valor , and strength , while the white ones represent light , cleanliness , and truth .
in order to convert the values to 20° , the unit commonly employed in calorimetric work , it has been necessary to multiply by the ratio of the specific heat of water at 15° to that of water at 20° .
despite her established reputation for clear writing and outstanding reporting , she has been accused of displaying certain contradictions between her professional ethics and her purported personal values .
thus , on the hypotheses of 48 and of 24 constants respectively , the values obtained for g2^0 in 1842-1845 were -.00127 and -.00057 , and those obtained for h3¹ in 1880 were +.00748 and +.00573 .
he values the bible above every other thing .
naturally we over-estimate what is close before us and is temporal , and hardly see at all and value what is far off and eternal , but by the gift of divine grace our spiritual vision is enabled to judge distances and judge values correctly .
it was urged on by speculators for a rise in values ; by demagogues who persuaded the mob that a nation , by its simple fiat , could stamp real value to any amount upon valueless objects .
in larger examples , many more values of fib , or subproblems , are recalculated , leading to an exponential time algorithm .
it criticised the film for not having the greatest production values , interviews sometimes became boring , and the sheer amount of information within the film " might overwhelm " .
high-index immersion fluids are approaching refractive index values of 1 .
pule o kaupule of nanumaga is a case that raised issues in relation to the balancing the freedoms of religion , expression and association that are set out in the constitution of tuvalu against the values of tuvaluan stability and culture that are also referred to in the constitution .
the numerical values correspond to the greek numerals , with being used for digamma , for koppa , and for sampi .
on this worship of games is based the scale of social values .
in that fine booming clerical voice he detected a kindred absence of delicate perception , a showiness born of very inadequate conception of relative values .
n are the values of the e .
the movie is an anti-establishment story that questions the values of middle america and the older generation .
the name " norm residue " originally referred to the hilbert symbol ( a _ 1 , a _ 2 ) , which takes values in the brauer group of k ( when the field contains all ℓ-th roots of unity ) .
you know , from first to last , i saw the business with my eyes open , i saw its ethical and moral values quite clearly .
v. long-range values in assessing the _practical_ values of space exploration it does not seem logical to limit considerations to those values which are immediate or near-future ones .
and as such it is a complex fact , resulting from a constant element , the æsthetic element of representation , and a variable element , the pleasing in its infinite forms , arising from all the various classes of values .
julius evola was among the supporters of this initiative for the possibilities it could offer in the creation of an elite inspired by the traditional values he espoused .
critical values .
at the age of 74 , mr partridge was the eldest member of the entertainment staff and the only one to be called by his honorific and surname out of respect for victorian values .
both values and hierarchies can be justified by the final point of agreement , which perelman and olbrechts-tyteca term loci of the preferable .
his works were deeply pessimistic and cynical , challenging the values of the enlightenment , romanticism , and christian humanism .
stock gambling , under whatever name it masquerades -- boosting values , buying and selling margins , reorganizations , with their huge rake-offs for the underwriters -- is the incubus which is crushing the life out of the nation 's industries , especially in the railroad field .
so far we have been unfolding the causes and courses of foreign exchange on the hypothesis , that both the nations exchanging employ the same standard in measuring values .
comparing free statistical software for data sets with no missing values " and " comparing free statistical software , handling missing data " .
standard output sensitivity ( sos ) in addition to the above speed ratings , the standard also defines the standard output sensitivity ( sos ) , how the exposure is related to the digital pixel values in the output image .
according to positive-feedback , an online audiophile magazine , johfu values his " japanese sensibilities " and is highly involved in every recording session , from the choice of songs to sound engineering and packaging .
additionally , individuals who disclose personal values to others may facilitate the ease of accurate judgment of neuroticism .
my theory is that if it is a nondescript appearance that one values most , one is more likely to find it in that which adheres to a degree of formality .
although gilder had been a zealous reformer , as a conservative in politics and values he never embraced the progressive movement .
we may obtain their values by determining the solubilities of salts in pure water , whenever the solubility is not affected by other chemical changes .
no parallel example does the earth exhibit of the sacrifice of transcendent values for pitiful ends .
key tools to study algebraic function fields are absolute values , valuations , places and their completions .
the interpretation of any value was determined by the operators used to process the values .
[ sidenote : values of things distant in time ] 3 .
while the main body fights to gain an immediate advantage in progress , there are others who should maintain eternal values far above the victors of tomorrow or yesterday and which are beyond all the rest and throw light on the way above the smoke of battle .
he was also implicated due to abnormal values in his blood passport .
see also extended table of comparative values in 1790 and 1795 .
regarding germany , the first forgery was the 12 pfennig hindenburg head stamp , later followed by the 3 , 4 , 6 , and 8 pfennig values , to distribute propaganda material in germany .
on three of the rouble values are views which include the kremlin at moscow ( 1 rouble ) , the winter palace at st. petersburg ( 2 roubles ) , and the romanof house ( 3 roubles ) .
on that volume , and on those conditions , bargains will be made , prices established , debts contracted , values adjusted , and equities created .
as none of these failed in shear , the ultimate shearing resistance of concrete must be considerably higher than any of the values given .
the logic of dependency-the japanese amé-is one of embedded relations and many conjectures resulting in a logic of actions , a different way of thinking , and a different system of values .
_automatic description of diagrams._ there are many other kinds of diagrams in which the two co-ordinates of a point in a plane are employed to indicate the simultaneous values of two related quantities .
i perceive , already , that she highly regards you , and values your opinion .
uccello had a sense of tactile values and a feeling for colour , but in so far as he used these gifts at all , it was to illustrate scientific problems .
legal tenders are the standard of values , says the court ; coin and all marketable articles have their values measured by treasury notes .
for specific values for other countries than the ones on the list , see source links below .
probably the values for the northern division may be silver values .
even though the haze has cleared off a bit in the southern parts of the nation , port klang had been recording a very unhealthy series of api values and skyrocketed to the hazardous range with the scale rising up to 487 in the morning of 25 june .
for heptachlor epoxide , the oral ld50 values ranging from 46 .
once the non zero values are located non linear least squares can be used on the original model m ( f , p,ac ) to refine these values .
if it discourage production to tax values which labor and capital have intimately combined with that of land , how much greater discouragement is involved in taxing not only these , but all the clearly distinguishable values which labor and capital create ?
sometimes these standards can be itemized in a list that states the community 's values and sets guidelines for participation in the community .
wikipedia articles through a focus on the values of the unification church of sun myung moon .
profits from surging tradable securities are used to buy property and drive up its values .
mr. barnum values his interest in the barnum and london shows at $ 3,500,000 .
pre-civil war americans regarded southerners as a distinct people , who possessed their own values and ways of life .
the toys for sale are interesting only for the value which the characters assign to them ; the result is a miscellany of characters assigning a miscellany of values .
this is all patent nonsense because aunt mattie is the rock , the firm foundation in a universe of shifting values .
the goal of complexity analysis in this model is to find time bounds that depend only on and not on the actual size of the input values or the machine words .
the values of such a riddance is well shown by another sentence from the ms. of our veteran .
he challenged the core values of a practice of psychiatry which he thought considered mental illness as a biological phenomenon without regard for social , intellectual and cultural dimensions .
it was universally criticised for its poor production values and due to dismal ratings it was moved to digital channel go !
calculating the values of the circuit 's resistors and capacitors is done based on the components employed and the intended use of the amp .
these values represent lds church morals and each have an associated color in the program .
x and y values of intersection on a linear curve section .
this is very much more apparent when we consider the values that arise in the great speculative markets , say in the wheat pit , or the stock exchange .
he was intelligent , unprejudiced and calm and , lee added , remote from the values , the ponderous authority , of a northern hypocritical society .
using mathematical modeling to numerically simulate the behavior of the complex system , the in vitro data providing model parameter values .
for the oral examinations , the values shall be marked at the time by the professor , with the approbation of the committee , but the number attached to any exercise of this kind shall not exceed 20 .
the sensuous or suggestive values of nature are caught by the poet 's quick feeling for beauty , and fixed by his creative activity .
this is a yellow-blue chromatic dimension , varying from positive values appearing more yellowish to negative values appearing more blueish .
these effects lead to pressure being one half to one third of that required for ignition , far below the predicted values .
these mean values , ranges and amplitudes are all measured in volts per metre ( in the open ) .
the tables in the exoplanets statistics section should probably have different cutoff values .
to fetch a property , it is sufficient to scan though all of the values associated with that property and return them as some form of list ( or a single value or nil ) .
we have no credible argentine time-series to inflate the value of the object purchased , so we should leave the values uninflated in the contract price indicated for the year .
this panic was not the result of paper-money inflation , nor of inflated values , nor of reckless over-trading , nor of in-ordinate speculation .
the light , to be sure , was not all that might have been desired , but it was abundant , window screens were cheap and the sculptor not over sensitive to subtile gradations of values .
twenty-three thousand people are said to have left the city , and real-estate values suffered severely .
perlis ' only revenues were a set of three values issued in 1951 showing the syed alwi state mosque in kangar .
these point estimates may be used as initial values that can be refined with more powerful methods including maximum likelihood .
kovel asserts that " violence is the rupturing of ecosystems " and is therefore " deeply contrary to ecosocialist values " .
the “ prospective values ” of the single workman change in such a case .
there are from twenty to twenty-five years difference in the ages of the negroes , and there is a proportionate difference in their values .
and tito set about winning messer bernardo 's respect by inquiring , with his ready faculty , into florentine money-matters , the secrets of the _monti_ or public funds , the values of real property , and the profits of banking .
just as a periodic function of a real variable is defined by its values on an interval , an elliptic function is determined by its values on a fundamental parallelogram , which then repeat in a lattice .
the set of ideas , beliefs and values that are shared and agreed by the majority of the population , the centre ground that by definition often excludes alternative positions .
in this world , where it is impossible to reach absolute values , we are forced to hold things relatively , and in contrast with the long , lonely miles of our ride during the day these two houses , with their outbuildings , seemed a center of life .
tta programs do not define the operations , but only the data transports needed to write and read the operand values .
chapter viii. -- _the 1c orange of 1869._ the 1c and 3c stamps of 1868 were so alike in color that it was soon found that confusion was easily possible between the two values .
chace 's work focused on american statesmanship , the interplay of american interests with american values , and the use of american power .
its core values are derived from the presbyterian christian faith .
on the other hand , the subtlety which he succeeded in giving to all his local colors , laid on as they were in simple flat tones , is the result of a profoundly sensitive feeling for values .
it 's just a basic macro calling a function which calculate the maximum between 2 values .
the following table gives the yield and the average farm values per acre for five staple crops for five years , 1905-1909 inclusive , for the united states and for four widely separated states , viz. , pennsylvania , iowa , texas and oregon .
with respect to computers , deterministic memory is computer memory which contains values that can be depended on from access to access .
in order to keep and maintain the values of the regime in future years , metaxas gave birth to the ethniki organosi neolaias ( εθνική οργάνωση νεολαίας , national organisation of youth , eon ) .
the brokers , the customers , the clerks , the exchange door-keepers , all wall street read the morning papers , not to ascertain the news , but to pick such items as would , should , or might , have some effect on stock values .
consider a 3-digit molecule [ a , b,c ] where a , b , and c can take on the values 0 and 1 .
she needs to be trained in artistic values and artistic weights and measures , to study all the arts and sciences of the beautiful , and then she is charming .
blood values are typically unimportant but may be needed to show myocarditis or dehydration from vomiting .
although the stanfords were religious , but not formally committed to any christian denomination , they viewed " spiritual and moral values as essential to a young person 's education and future citizenship " .
the read-in values are then checked for consistency .
in 1975 , johansson and rosengren examined the measured and predicted values for the cohesive energies ( enthalpies of crystallization ) of the metallic lanthanides and actinides , both as divalent and trivalent metals .
in the 1994 elections , the republican focus on " family values " , while the democrats largely ignored this framing , is key to lakoff .
economic values are dubiously objective .
the highways are wasted , the wayfarer ceaseth ; he breaks the covenant , despises cities , values no man .
all valid css margin values are accepted .
hillis miller , " money , money , money , and what money can make of life " , but is also about human values .
the table gives the orthographic symbol and the primary phonetic values for each vowel .
it stands as a reminder of quaker values of stewardship and respect for the environment , and provides a touchstone to the recent , and distant past .
disregard of values and morals previously seen as vital are stereotypical .
all his curiosities take place of one another according to their seniority , and he values them not by their abilities , but their standing .
the slaves on his plantation were great believers in roots and their values in the use of conjuring people .
the intermixing of units gives us a wrong conception of the values of each phenomenon ; the results of our calculations are wrong and the outcome is a misconception of the process of human life .
he values other men , as we do cattle , for their service only ; and , if he could , would use them so ; but as it happens , the number and force are unequal .
it { 191 } _is_ good , for him ; and being good for him , is absolutely good , for he is the sole creator of values in that universe , and outside of his opinion things have no moral character at all .
this hundred thousand pounds he declares he would have concealed , if he could ; and yet he values himself upon the discovery of it .
vowels , too , have shifted their values .
`` the value of a thing newly created can be explained only with reference to values antecedently existing . ''
a culture is a social system that shares a set of common values , in which such values permit social expectations and collective understandings of the good , beautiful , constructive , etc .
the artistic sense is more widely diffused there ; life centres in paris , where values can be readily compared ; and , above all , the custom of personal journalism prevails in france .
a sea in its greatness , and a marsh in its diverse variations of colour , are both perfect in their artistic values , only different in conception .
summer and winter represent each six months and the results are arithmetic means of the monthly values .
those who think otherwise are unacquainted with mathematical laws other than simple proportion or some continuous or additive functions ; they are not aware of discontinuities ; they are not experienced in critical values , above which certain conditions obtain , while below them there is suddenly nothing .
the letters of the early cyrillic alphabet had the values of melodic modes ( азъ , боукы , вѣдѣ , глаголи , добро , єсть , живѣтє , ѕѣло ) .
he had lost his sense of world values for the time being , and just now a fortune was no more than a hot-water bag when one ’ s feet were cold .
adams gives the values obtained from the x , y and the z equations separately for the gaussian constants .
greater values of p assign greater influence to values closest to the interpolated point , with the result turning into a mosaic of tiles ( a voronoi diagram ) with nearly constant interpolated value for large values of p .
subjectivity of aesthetic values , 3,4 .
on to-day 's values .
all sense of values had been lost , which may account for the fabulous and fictitious prices in the south for several years after the war , and the liberality of appropriations of the first legislature after the surrender , which in small matters was severely economical .
he surveys the problems of love , social strife , and disconnection from spiritual values , but decides that taking his own advice is a good enough start .
hundreds of members of the iranian political or religious elite have sent their sons to this school , which is famous for its high quality education in math , physics , and natural sciences , as well as an emphasis on shia religious values and teachings .
we may put it with more cogency and truth : the opposition lies between a philosophy without values and a philosophy based upon them .
it shows how such unconventional democracy and matter-of- fact respect for spiritual values existed in the later middle ages , that no one seems to have been surprised at the situation .
distinction should be made between the virtual and `` effective '' values of an alternating current .
the term is near-impossible to define in a npov manner due to the wide range of values it can possibly represent .
the high importance placed on self-determination in american culture may go against the traditional values of cultures in which children are expected to obey and respect the wishes of their parents in all facets of their lives .
all experimental selectors , properties and values are prefixed with " -webkit- " , e .
and she is a rare judge of values .
a tool that helps to organize templates in hierarchies and perform synchronization of updated values from parent to children .
list of films ranked by a subjective assessment of their " expectation among audience , star and director values , etc .
since the missionaries of the 1820s the primitive hawaiian religion was easily overcome by christianity , hawaiians had disowned their heritage , traded hawaiian values for american values , and adopted english , driving the hawaiian language to near extinction .
stated goals include guiding islamic work and activities , organizing the efforts of the islamic umma ( muslim nation ) to be in service of islamic issues and activating divine values to achieve human dignity , security , and justice on earth .
the first and gross manifestation of this truth , is our inevitable and hated training in values and wants , in corn and meat .
these don 't correspond to the spectral sensitivities of the cells in our eyes , a linear transformation ( the color matrix ) is used to compute the rgb values and then some nonlinear transforms are used .
a list solver feature allows variables to be associated with ranges of data or probability distributions , solving for multiple values , which is useful for generating tables and plots and for running monte carlo simulations .
this estimate was made at a time when the country was slowly recovering , as the set phrase goes , from the panic of 1892-94 , and when land values were not in a state of inflation or rise .
extended ørsted scalein 1871 the ørsted scale was extended with plus and minus-steps , and numeral values were added accordingly .
i hope , as the publisher of a work which hopefully itself values verifiability , balance , and truthfulness , you understand why wikipedia has these standards .
the free choice 2008 committee is an entity chaired by chess champion garry kasparov and dedicated to an unconditional adherence to fundamental democratic values recognized by the modern civilized world .
c ) _attitudes and wishes._ -- the wishes , as popularly conceived , are as numerous as the objects or values toward which they are directed .
to develop knowledge , skills and values in the children to prosper in a competitive world .
watershed values of the montezuma the forests of the montezuma have high watershed value and a forest cover is very important , because the dominant soil types are silt and clay loam which erode readily .
most instructions refer to a single value , or a pair of values .
it is important to be knowledgeable about the values , strategies and products that are within your company , but also when these things are changing .
in 2010 , unicredit tiriac bank was the main partner of the culture crusade , an initiative that promotes authentic cultural values .
the figure below shows three typical realizations of fractional brownian surfaces for different values of the roughness or hurst parameter .
after some thought and discussion , they decide that , when comparing residual values , they want to look at the higher one as a percentage of the lower , and assign their intensities on that basis .
other authorities , including the magen avraham , have written that one should drink until one is unable to calculate the gematria ( numerical values ) of both phrases .
his rare gift of discerning bibliographical values has been constantly in evidence .
the knowledge , skills and professional values required of a cga are reflected in a list of competencies .
in image processing , the samples can be the values of pixels along a row or column of a raster image .
when now for the first time we see these things happening near at hand we are aghast at this self-sufficiency and arrogance ; this complete contempt for human values . ''
these agents were accused of intimidating white homeowners with claims that their neighborhood was becoming increasingly african-american and home values could decline .
the spelling has remained more or less traditional , and though it becomes finally phonetic , it seems to ascribe to the vowels the values nearest to those of the mother-language and current in certain varieties of the lithuanian group .
it adopted the symbol of male and female heads , to indicate its emphasis on " family values " .
the values of _l_ , _b_ are computed from ( αδ ) with the help of tables in preparation at the lund observatory , or from the original to plate i at the end , allowing the conversion of the equatorial coordinates into galactic ones .
freud 's views have also made a revision of all ethical and social values unavoidable and have thrown an unexpected flood of light upon literary and artistic accomplishment .
had he some mental talisman by which he accurately gauged all values , his own included ?
and as melody may -- nay , must -- exist , if the orchestration be really beautiful , so colour must inhere wherever the values have been finely observed .
so long as the respective alignments of the similar sounds is different , so long as they have differing `` values '' and '' weights '' in the unrelated languages , these languages can not be said to have diverged materially from the line of their inherent drift .
his surroundings at the moment supplied the contrast , for these surroundings were petty and ignoble -- they drove him by the distress of sheer disgust into the world of larger values he had known with her .
the qur 'an is more concerned with moral guidance than legal instruction , and is considered the " sourcebook of islamic principles and values " .
culturally specific programs and services that focus on characteristics that include the target population values , beliefs , and styles of problem solving may be beneficial in reducing recidivism among african american inmates ; programs involving social skills training and social problem solving could also be effective .
many thanks , olga _mia ! _ thine ancient uncle values the gift for the sake of the giver . ''
when the margin of difference between the values , with and without the tariff , is kept small the temptation is but slight , when the danger of detection and the drastic nature of the usual punishment are taken into account .
determining , therefore , the values of _a_ , _b_ , _c_ ... , which are equal to small and easy fractions and fulfil the condition just mentioned , we obtain series of powers which are adapted to the computation of π .
true lovers of men , who set the values of life and of the spirit first , who give their lives that all men may have freedom and means to find more abundant life , come out of the families where the passion of human love burns high .
its utility of course consists in informing librarians or collectors of the most recent auction values of books .
[ 60 ] thermometers should always hang freely ; when they are enclosed in cases they give false values , especially if the cases should be filled with snow .
such perspectives value that which can be externally measured and tested in a laboratory , but tend to deny or marginalize the left sides ( subjectivity , individual experience , feelings , values ) as unproven or having no meaning .
all economic values are social values .
some ( or all ) of the values of the sequence are negative .
the institute 's four freedoms center is designed to promote a rigorous debate about progressive policies and values and to deploy their strongest proponents in the public sphere .
it is based on the values of human rights , interdependence , choice and social inclusion , and can be designed to enable people to direct their own services and supports , in a personalised way .
the passage to postindustrial society takes place when investment results in the production of symbolic goods that modify values , needs , representations , far more than in the production of material goods or even of ' services ' .
he credits confucianism with teaching `` fair and square dealings with every man , '' but adds , `` it nevertheless fails to meet the people 's yearning after the eternal values . ''
the initial slope of the function at the initial value depends on the number and order of zeros and poles that are at values below the initial value , and are found using the first two rules .
are stated in silver solidi of twelve denarii , let us divide them by three , so as to restore them to gold values in solidi of three tremisses .
without genius the national drama was heavy and lumpish , stolidly clinging to unquestioned and untested values , looking for no higher rewards in life than riches and public esteem .
every human is the xth cousin y times removed to every other human on the planet , for sufficiently large values of x and y , and that is unequivocally true .
bone meal , finely-broken bones , small quantities of guano , and even carefully-applied nitrate of soda ( half-an-ounce to the square yard ) have their respective values , but the novice will be wise in placing reliance on farm-yard manure for the bulk of his plants .
the program is designed to teach children lessons in moral character and values .
but he should be taught to see things in their true values and proportions .
a common criticism of the concept of asian values is the perceived success of many asian democratic societies such as taiwan , hong kong , japan , and south korea .
the deep values of the trees , the yellowish greys of the road , and the sluggish water of the ditches , together with the blue sky flecked with little grey and white clouds produce an ensemble of absolute calm .
because of her involvement with the betty crocker division and her desire to make the food industry recognize family values , bates received the nickname of " betty crocker .
of international values .
and he values this experience so largely because he learns arabic , and , above all , he learns the arabic character .
by clearing the market based on the dual prices , participants are charged on marginal values , rather than as bid .
theriya tradition attempts to make out that in the organization of the sasana social considerations , as much as moral and ethical values , loomed large in the mind of the master .
with the outbreak of the mazdakite revolution , there was a great uprising of peasants and lower class citizens who grabbed large portions of land under egalitarian values .
viewers are encouraged to pass on these values , with the rationale that examples of individuals living values-based lives may not change the world , but collectively they make a difference .
text to separate values in a range .
religious values , 9 , 16 .
money is based on a fiat whereupon all agree upon the exchange values of any one currency for another .
1881 logarithms of the values of all inst .
compose the landscape into borders of different proportions ; then vary each of these in two values .
he knew the price of butter and of oatmeal , of cattle and of sheep , and his information was often of great value to the farmers in adjusting the values of farm produce .
i suppose they had no real idea of values , but knew only the difference between having money and not having money .
you don 't have to be christian to acknowledge that the bible is the source of america 's values .
then vegavatí engaged with her brother in a struggle which was remarkable for a great display of magic power ; for a woman values her lover as her life , and much more than her own relations .
some experts expect the worst consumer recession , since 1980 , to occur when aging boomers start retiring , adding to rising unemployment , decline in house values , and declining stock prices .
the 386 processor also uses 32 bit values for the address offset .
this is esteemed the best possible security for payments long deferred , because the ordinary values of real estate in a growing country like ours increase rather than diminish .
the summation of the numerical values of the whorl type patterns , if any , appearing in fingers 1 , 3 , 5 , 7 , 9 , plus one , is the denominator of the primary .
one of their values to me is that i can now and then please a friend with them .
for each variable , the values are normally all of the same kind .
the underlying values that parecon seeks to implement are equity , solidarity , diversity , workers ' self-management and efficiency ( defined as accomplishing goals without wasting valued assets ) .
article 5 of the act provides that the central government and the competent municipal authorities may issue land bonds to pay for the purchase of private lands at their declared values .
thus , within the sphere of exchange all commodities are or appear to each other as exchange values in the form of linen .
they shared an interest in politics and libertarian values , and maintained an active correspondence for the rest of mazzei 's life .
it carries a strong message for the young generation to preserve and uplift the traditional values while accepting modernity .
i know that and i ’ m for it strong and any regular actress with any real sense of values would be , too , but this stephano female isn ’ t that kind of a person .
these values are subject to slight variations due to changes in the varnish of the pastille emulsion .
owing to their varying values in different conditions the choice of explosive to be used in any particular case must evidently depend upon the circumstances attending it .
such a statement alone would warrant action of some sort looking toward increased knowledge of food values and food preparation .
it was positively uncanny to hear the new values , the basic principles of good and evil , conveyed by one so absolutely unsuspecting of their import .
yet the principal occasion for rents in such countries is exactly the same as that for varying values of land in the united states .
protonk , and i find that the promotion of it to go against most of our core values .
for such judgments involve the assumption that there exists a fixed scale of objective values .
conscription , values of , 136 ; enforced in germany , 136 .
have you ever asked him what the values where .
applying this principle to mankind , nietzsche attacked christian moral values .
he would give rich carpets , perfumes , armours of rare price and force , and so much he values you , a troop , ay , of his favourite horse .
we should not value the teaching of our religion `` as a miser values his pearls and jade , thinking their value lessened if pearls and jade are found in other parts of the world . ''
no one values human life or understands its sacredness more than i do .
those studies have reinforced its efforts to advocate for the production of more values based films and have been relied upon by some in the industry seeking support for their projects .
bowery boys ( monogram pictures ) and detectives such as the shadow , were generally characterized by low budgets , casts made up of lower ranked stars or unknowns , and overall production values that unintentionally betrayed the haste and economy with which they were made .
their proportional values are as follows : first , 1.000 ; second , 0.999 ; third , 1.005 ; fourth , 0.981 .
however , nanak emphasised māyā as not a reference to the unreality of the world , but of its values .
tires at factory prices share with us our savings in trainload tire contracts and in the samson , record and hedgethorn tires get the best tire values in america at wholesale factory prices .
`` how do you figure values here ? ''
if only my conception of social value is granted , i may safely enough concede professor davenport all the depravity he can find in society , and recognize that that depravity has its part in the determination of the concrete values .
to develop a greater public appreciation of the pleasures and values of game bird hunting .
a more natural way of freeing the congestion in the benefits of material progress will make it less difficult for the majority to recognize the true relation between the important spiritual and religious values and the less important intellectual and economic values .
the discovery of coal oil in the united states in 1859 , and the great advances made in the methods and apparatus for sinking oil wells , have resulted in the discovery of numerous wells of natural gas , whose values were quickly perceived and utilized by their owners .
*transcriber 's note : all values in [ sigma ] , 1/1000ths of a second .
yes i know planetary habitability laboratory does this but that website is so full of unfounded speculation and bogus values that it should not be considered a reliable source .
but the sensuous and associative values of these things -- especially of music -- are so great , that even without an appreciation of form considerable beauty may be found in them .
the application , among other things , lists all countries of intended transit and all applicable goods with their assigned values .
the next morning there was a panic in wall street and nearly two million shares were flung overboard , with a loss of five hundred million dollars in market values .
the chart below details the sequence of prize values for each round of the game .
although accurate asymptotic estimates are known for larger values of n , it is unknown whether there exists an exact formula that can be used to compute these numbers efficiently .
the values and standards used in child rearing are commonly closely related to the parent 's occupational status .
asymmetric scaling can be accomplished by varying the values of x , y , and z .
one , for example , values whiskey positively , approaches , absorbs it , aims to increase its quantity and sale ; another apprehends it negatively , turns from it , strives to oust it from the world .
induction variable or recursive strength reduction replaces a function of some systematically changing variable with a simpler calculation using previous values of the function .
agriculture , 118-122 ; values , table of , 121 .
eating-values may succumb to the pain values instead of the pain to the eating-values .
this overestimation is rather small for small risks , but becomes higher for higher values .
then follows reflective consideration of one 's unique situation with its possible alternatives and an examination of the values inherent in them .
it knows no longer how to fix the peculiarities of things , how to notice the different traits of men's characters , their interests , their diverse values , until finally it becomes indifferent and sceptical .
the commonly accepted values for the transition point voltage are 0 .
the six values of yiss are resilience , responsibility , respect , compassion , confidence , and integrity and the school motto is ' ilmu suluh hidup ' ( knowledge is the light of life ) .
there are also many regions where timber values do not warrant patrol , but where the safety of other property , and of life , demand both patrol and fire fighting .
_sapa_ , _fratrem_ , _canem_ , _kælum_ , _fakere_ , _cambiare_ , etc. , or those that have changed the english vowels in _fate_ , _feet_ , _fight_ , _foot_ , _out_ from what they were when the letters which denote them still had their ‘ continental ’ values .
when a voxel is reached that has a higher y value on the display it is added to the y-buffer overriding the previous value and connected with the previous y-value on the screen interpolating the color values .
in 1889 a shortage of 10 öre values necessitated the surcharge of 12 öre and 24 öre numerals .
you may be sure he deeply values the loyal and persevering efforts of your assembly to promote the faith in all its aspects in australia and new zealand .
after values are settled , property tax bills or notices are sent to property owners .
let us cultivate our sense of ethical values and of ethical perspective rather than to crouch behind a shrub until it looks like a forest .
most of his other essays worked to promote realist ideals and values , such as local color and distinction and originality in art .
she rejected many of her parents ' values , increasingly becoming a vocal feminist , and made many attempts to pass herself off as a woman of iberian ( spanish ) descent named filipa monterro .
nietzsche outlines methods of conduct , and dissects the actions and attitudes of his disciples , praising them or blaming them in accordance with his own values .
the fascination of _seeming_ to have caught the values led him far into the deceiving shades of night with often disastrous results . ''
normal values indicated in the following tables pertain to humans ( normals vary among species ) .
rota received the strongest winds , with gusts peaking at at the international airport while sustained values reached .
these high values render hardened tungsten-steel particularly suitable for the manufacture of permanent magnets .
latin letters served as the basis for the forms of the cherokee syllabary developed by sequoyah ; however , the sound values are completely different .
as there are positive and negative values , so there are positive and negative wishes .
in 1852 louis napoléon became president of the republic , and , being a man who loved notoriety , he placed his bust upon the ten and twenty-five centimes values .
see jeremy waldron , `` from authors to copiers : individual rights and social values in intellectual property , '' chicago-kent law review 68 ( 1993 ) : 841 , 842 , 887 .
studying values , 255 , 257 , 259 .
though like other root vegetables onions and garlics also have many medicinal values .
these values differ in men and women because men tend to be larger than women .
silver became popular in some forces because of the higher resale values when sold .
the commonwealth foundation is an intergovernmental organisation established in 1965 , resourced by and reporting to commonwealth governments , and guided by commonwealth values and priorities .
do not seek absolute values in the relative world of nature . ''
westbourne offers a student-focused environment of educational excellence that promotes sound moral beliefs and values with mutual respect , ensuring that every pupil reaches their full , individual potential .
mr. leigh went on judicially : “ ask him whether his gains from the unearned increment as well as from increases in values in certain sections have fully offset his losses from the decline of what he considered choice property ten or fifteen years ago .
for guidance it also shows the typical values of μ and t in heavy-ion collisions and in the early universe .
and the home-life without the emotions to give values to it , is like a fine air played on the keyboard of a piano from which have been removed the strings that transform the movements of the fingers into melody .
blackstone says , and story repeats his language : `` money is a universal medium or common standard , by a comparison with which the value of all merchandise may be ascertained , or it is a sign which represents the respective values of all commodities . ''
3 ) way of the world , congreve 's 204 wealth 469 , 506 , 601 weaver on dancing 466 wedlock 525 weed , ephraim 450 weights showing true values 463 wenham , jane , the last condemned witch 117 ( fn .
the vanity and irresponsibility of values that are merely final and not also in turn means to the enrichment of other occupations of life ought to be obvious .
the myth which originally was but a symbol substituted for empirical descriptions becomes in the sequel an idol substituted for ideal values .
the values section contains the width , height , number of colors , and number of characters per pixel .
jahanbegloo further contends that in a country like iran , where the logic of the theological-political is still absolute and where there is a single master-value , the principal goal of the liberal movement is to campaign for a pluralism of ethical values and modes of being .
as values vary from 0 .
the slaveholder , indeed , values himself on his loftiness of spirit .
between may , 1862 , and january , 1879 , the `` greenback dollar '' was the measure of current values .
during the thirteen years , his adherence to religious values in face of adversity was repeatedly tested .
the errors of a boy must be corrected by corporal punishment , or by the deprivation of something which he values , or by his own self-reproach .
the law may seek to affect industry positively , by protective tariffs , for example , which aim at the building up of certain industries , but its effects are here indirect , reached through modifications in the economic values .
speaking of values , the consensus of opinion of our countrymen in the interior is , that putting a price on our work , the people of anatolia have gained twice or thrice the actual money spent , and that the moral support given was far beyond any valuation .
these rights can be stipulated by law , but also by non-legal codes , corporate values , mission statements and moral rights .
your original expression has two negative values , and the product of two negatives is always positive .
a motive includes different note values , and its iterations may end on a downbeat .
the only bond appeared to lie in the region of the judgment of values , itself essentially aesthetic .
in practice , all values of sines , cosines , and tangents not found in this article are approximated using the techniques described at generating trigonometric tables .
nevertheless , it is the lectures dealing with intellectual values that will rouse , as i suppose , the most serious opposition .
in concluding the discussion of relative values we will summarize the results .
on other pieces are characters or symbols denoting their values .
it does not at all imply pre-romantic values to suggest that ogilvie ’ s criticism is directed toward a frank exploitation of the reader ’ s emotion .
institutional values such as honesty , tolerance , respect for others and the cultivation of intellectual curiosity are the essence or our organizational approach .
truly it spelled excellent advertisement -- and this although two persons , calculated mightily to have heightened interest and brought up dramatic and emotional values , were absent from the scene .
selberg replaced the values of the möbius function which arise in this by a system of weights which are then optimised to fit the given problem .
the tdp is reference design tdp values from amd .
he further said that the owner chiefly values the two volumes of learned men 's letters , the saxon spieghel , and the prayerbook of solyman the magnificent . ''
one of the most frequent arguements made in the us 2004 election against gay rights was that it would further the break-up of families , undermine traditional values and so on .
july 5 , this exhibitionist queer rabble will hold a public procession and street ball , trampling under foot all fundamental traditional moral values and proclaiming hungary 's occupation by aberrants and foreigners .
of course land values will eventually find their true level , whatever law of rating may be in force .
in this branch of politics , motives were so mixed that no historian can hope to appraise them all at their proper values .
but if he values courage , he also pities rather than despises , and never insults those who `` want liver . ''
no standard by which the values of different ideas might be measured .
e is the type of entities in the domain , and t is the type of truth values .
occasionally he bathes a scene in yellow mist that obscures all accentuations and play of values .
swap the values and .
the great depression slashed the values of natural pearls , but there is no doubt this had been some time coming .
but values had shifted considerably during the years of the great war , and in the year of peace both male babies , even though unauthorized , and between-maids , had come to be recognized as very distinctly valuable assets .
the party 's website states it will " champion the development of broad policies and ideas that match the values of our community and members " .
however , they are normally loosened in third seat , when the partner has already passed , so the opening bidder can be sure that the only side preempted are the opponents , and thus can bid with better or thinner values .
the 2007 " credit meltdown " has affected home values in the area to a lesser extent than the rest of southern california .
each of the 32 moments is then subdivided into from two to thirteen subsections , again using fibonacci numbers , in most cases with some values repeated .
the underlying structure of literacy is reflected in national movements and their dualistic system of values .
this template makes a table line with two values that applies a length of month factor to the background color formula , to specify precipitation , rain , or snow , add the .
the complete outline for the volumes which were to be called `` the transvaluation of all values '' and which were to be incorporated in his final general plan , is as follows : 1 .
disney wanted to embed the values and memories associated with life in small towns into an entertainment experience for tourists .
it means they will have both infringing and noninfringing uses , and the noninfringing uses will be centrally connected to our deepest values of free speech and cultural decentralization .
it reflects our regional idiosyncrasies , our ethnic , religious , and racial diversity , our multitude of professions , and our shadings of opinion on everything from the value of war to the war over values .
the doctrine that there is a definite , unchanging sum of economic values , therefore , can not , in my judgment , be maintained .
the base year can be any year , and comparisons of quantities are valid provided all values are adjusted to their values in the same base year .
you must fill in at least the name of the article in which the logo is being used and the " use " field with one of the listed permissible values .
put _inri_ into a circle , or read it as the letters stand in the square , as to its values of 1521 , and we have [ symbol : circle with numbers inside : 1 , 1 , 2 , 5 ] which reads 115·2 .
later spreadsheets also include a limited ability to propagate values in reverse , altering source values so that a particular answer is reached in a certain cell .
letters of inquiry were sent to real estate men and bankers in every county in the state ( some 500 being communicated with ) , as to land values in the town or county of each .
what one knows another is ignorant of—what one values another despises—here nature is prodigal , there niggardly—a virtue which it is difficult to practise in one climate or latitude becomes easy in another .
above all men , it is the labouring man who needs sound money and steady values .
formerly , the chief result of the effort of universal history had seemed to be that man rises more and more above nature and builds for himself a realm with new contents and new values .
from 1973 , three values became the norm , often with two lower value stamps of the same value issued as a se-tenant pair , with a third higher value stamp .
on the wall were several charts -- one showing the different cuts of beef and lamb , another by figures and diagrams giving the different nutritive values of different articles of food .
it will not destroy values .
the other “ snobbishness ” is based on pure ignorance of the true values of life , and has so far excuse .
when a verification fails , the party now broadcasts both the values received in part 1 and the values received in part 3 .
even if s is infinite , repetition of values may be necessary in this case .
the academy seeks to preserve the traditional values associated with the cowboy image despite consolidation in the cattle industry and changes in contemporary society .
perl parsers that allow loading of objects of arbitrary class create so-called " blessed " values .
a major advantage sesams have over other saturable absorber techniques is that absorber parameters can be easily controlled over a wide range of values .
it is the story of a woman trying to reexamine her own values and free herself from social restraints after suffering a lifetime of oppression .
to that , both discussion of the philosophy of life and of the relative values in life , of various kinds of experience and experiment in the light of the conclusions reached , are needed .
the real tests of the comparative values of different methods of brewing are the flavor and palatibility of the drink , in conjunction with the number of cups of a given strength which are produced , or the relative strengths of brews of the same number of cups volume .
he has made it a point to sing both vande matram and jan gana mana at the end of all his congregations , to inspire people into values of patriotism .
it is not to be understood from this that unbroken linseed oil is never to be used for ordinary paint or varnish , the warning being only given for the sake of arriving at reliable values for the quality of the driers to be tested .
there was a strong allegiance with pop music , and the values and effectiveness of that in reaching out to a wide audience informed the poetry .
strictly , however , the conditional volatilities from garch models are not stochastic since at time t the volatility is completely pre-determined ( deterministic ) given previous values .
( 6 ) when teaching or alluding to the peculiarities and semantic values of prepositions choose as far as possible prepositions such as _in_ , _on_ , _under_ , _over_ , _in front of_ , _behind_ , _beside_ , etc .
resolution of an equation of the second degree with one unknown quantity. -- double solution. -- imaginary values .
but honesty and courage , as men go in the world , are after all merely relative values .
slave prices in early nineteenth century us ] ( caps theirs ) which has similar values but they are 2003 dollars , not early 1800 's dollars .
in april and june 1993 , several types of russian stamps were surcharged in ruble values , followed in august by the first stamps denominated in tyiyn .
from that date until 1892 no further changes were made so far as new designs or values were concerned though some striking alterations in shade took place , notably in the case of the 6c and 10c values .
the above example simply states that the function takes the value for all x values larger than a .
mikhail minakov travels around the world with public lectures promoting ideas and practices of tolerance , values based leadership and communicative rationality .
this includes products , processes and systems as an expression of cultural values of the individual but also as a carrier of conventions of a community .
what are some of the most erroneous ideas as to food values ?
[ 10 ] z. , p. 12 * * * * * chapter iv nietzsche the evolutionist '' transvalue your values or perish ! ''
he argues that human communication is something more than its rational form ; that its cultural context , and the values and experience of the audience are as important .
this being said , it is appropriate that we , as we begin our new year of publication , explicitly state our values , so that our readers may be made aware of them and their various virtues and shortcomings .
in use , the system to be modelled would be represented as a single line diagram and all the impedances of lines and machines would be scaled to model values on the analyzer .
here u´ , [ nu ] ´ are the values of the component velocities of g just before , and u , [ nu ] their values just after , the impulse , whilst [ omega ] ´ , [ omega ] denote the corresponding angular velocities .
the glitter of gold and the glamour of furs pales when contrasted with the untold values that have since been taken out in the baser metals and lumber .
thus logical values can be stored in integer variables , and used anywhere integers would be valid , including in indexing , arithmetic , parsing , and formatting .
l is typically set at 3 to match other control charts , but it may be necessary to reduce l slightly for small values of λ .
to infinitesimal values of the parameters , thus chosen , will correspond operations which cause an infinitesimal change in each of the variables .
accepted values are up ( rank improves ) , down ( rank regression ) , and steady ( no rank changes ) .
i 'm sure my values are all right .
man , that makes it impossible to do historical work with these values .
set to true to force append a value without tostring coercion , including invalid values .
it had a control structure for values of x = 3 , 7 , 99 do ... that would repeat the indicated instructions for each value in the list ( unlike the usual for that only works for arithmetic sequences of values ) .
in coding theory , the forney algorithm ( or forney 's algorithm ) calculates the error values at known error locations .
furthermore , by discretizing the coin values , each of these merge operations can be performed via convolution , which can often be performed more efficiently with the fast fourier transform ( fft ) .
most algal studies have been carried out in small units and the data obtained have been used as a basis for extrapolating logistic values for the use of these organisms in manned space vehicles .
the wikimedia foundation is not only committed to free content , but also uses free software and lists " open formats and open standards on the web " among its values .
it is also possible to set default values or types for class template parameters .
on top of the legal allegations , a group of three professors from mit and harvard made public allegations that the turnpike authority had been using inflated numbers to push through its bond issues , thus artificially inflating their values .
the approximate london market values of oak-bark are : -- english , 12-16_l._ per load of 45 cwt .
the result of an ejb ql query is either a single object , a collection of entity objects of a given type , or a collection of values retrieved from cmp fields .
can i set the domain of cell values ( b , p , x , etc .
future aspects of these activities , and the associated moral values , make us sometimes forget that the syncretic nature of human beings , i.e. , projection of their natural endowment in the practical act , is expressed in the syncretism of the tools used .
reverse indexes are just as efficient as unreversed indexes for finding specific values , although they aren 't helpful for range queries .
the ra stands for conservative , traditional values and supports belarusian national revival .
in the end the sitting was an uncomfortable accommodation between the system of values under which the artists had laboured and their desire for career success .
land values remain much the same ; in some quarters land has depreciated , in other places it has increased in price ; buyers stand ready to take advantage of forced sales .
the actual values of the topic parameters can then readily be expressed in terms of the elements of the crystals ( the axial ratios and angles ) , the density , and the molecular weight ( see groth , _physikalische krystallographie_ , or _chemical crystallography_ ) .
so like i said before , we have a bunch of primary sources with different , incompatible values and no way to really evaluate which source is better ( 4 official air forces sites for example ) .
in this wide gleaning in the field of letters -- a rich harvest from able and brilliant pens -- the gleaner hereby expresses grateful appreciation of these transplanted values .
but somehow , with all the storm and stress of things , notwithstanding the hate and revenge of disappointed greed , the rights of life are carried on , and the values of humanity prevail .
an original thinker , eustathios sometimes praised such secular values as military prowess .
accumulation =_11,155,000_= surplus , by new york standard , =_2,254,000_= _cash surrender values .
the rheological changes are readily maintained and the viscosity approaches pretreatment values very slowly ( within about 10 days ) after stopping ancrod .
at a casual examination , or for demonstrative purposes , the extremes may be prominent , but for all further considerations the quartiles are the real values upon which to rest calculations .
in the most general case , the values for all the xk variables can be calculated by computing mason 's gain formula for the path from each yj to each xk and using superposition .
so it is , for the war is teaching us ethical values , which has always been a difficult matter .
we have already remarked how timely and necessary is this redefining of our religious values .
taking all that information we plug the values into the template .
according to this plan the index number is the ratio between these two values : the quantities initially consumed at the prices of the current date , and the same quantities at the standard prices .
the values of a given above are in terms of the international metre ; the earlier ones in legal metres , while the gravity formulae are in international metres .
the common fallacy is that values are things , or like things , plays into the hands of extremists , who believe that the more you have of a value the more virtuous you become , so that all convictions escalate in vehemence .
the british standard bs 1852 comprises a colour code for fixed resistors ; letter and digit code for resistance ( r for ohms , k for kilohms and m for megohms ) and capacitance values .
the destruction in question is a matter of values ; that is to say , a lowering of valuation , not in any appreciable degree a destruction of material goods .
this carefree character is much more conflicted than molina 's original and highlights the manner in which the values of the myth can be reinterpreted .
the values obtained by the use of allard 's formulae , which were largely used before the necessity for actual photometric measurements came to be appreciated , are considerably in excess of the true intensities .
during this program , probationary members learn basic information about the organization such as officer duties , rules , procedures , and traditions , and they are also instructed in the values and ideals of the fraternity .
rather than taking discrete values of a , b , c , .
under the guise of dada , it started in europe as a way to display their anti-art rhetoric as well as to communicate to the public their disgust for bourgeois values and their disapproval of world war i .
the band performs for schools , aiming to promote positive values through music .
although he also loves her , he cannot rise above his family values and succumbs to his parent 's pressure to marry someone against his wishes and leave for london to look after his family business .
this is achieved without exhaustive matching of values .
the values of reflective morality .
tembe is a proud native of botswana with deep christian values .
promote good citizenship , values and achievement by recognising excellence and service to the communities and the nation .
the yeshiva curriculum includes torah study , prayer , jewish law , hasidic teachings and jewish values .
i was given my release and a military ticket , but i was loath to leave the country which had opened my eyes to the deeper values of life .
luminosity is another expression of the quality above described as forming a prominent feature in the term values .
the values _ka_ and _gú_ come from the sign-name kâgu ( see hymn to bêl , lines 1 and 4 ) .
reality and fiction have about identical values in this type of mental make-up , and it is frequently impossible to separate the genuine from the fictitious in their mental productivity .
now , in case one assumes the essence of love to lie in the relation between man and woman , the comic aspect will show again in the face-about which is seen when the highest spiritual values express themselves in the most sensual terms .
substituting the values in equation ( 2 ) 1,500 × 10.79 circular mils = ————————————- = 10,381 1.559 [ illustration : figs .
the former governor identified clinton as the candidate with " the best ideas , the most energy , and the values and vision to lead our country .
players cannot recover point values of the bar medals even when a higher-valued medal remains on-screen .
but how can the conception of values enter here ?
statistical tolerance stackups evaluate the maximum and minimum values based on the absolute arithmetic calculation combined with some method for establishing likelihood of obtaining the maximum and minimum values , such as root sum square ( rss ) or monte-carlo methods .
in multi-note ligatures , the rules about initial and final values are applied in analogy to those in the binary forms .
if the outcome values are perfectly determined by the predictor ( e .
he often varied his movements in a piece by changing the note values of melodies , rather than the conventional change of tempi .
independently of instruments and figures , on which i set the highest values , i believe that the true _seeing_ of things may serve .
he says that huang 's art does not tell a story , but instead is in a pursuit of values towards traditional chinese cultures " within contemporary society itself , both chinese and international .
this allows the processor to know which register values can be ( reasonably ) trusted during runahead mode .
he defined a crisis as a time of upheaval where old values or choices are being reexamined and new alternatives are explored - ' times during adolescence when the individual seems to be actively involved in choosing among alternative occupations and beliefs ' .
* * * * * dr. edwin a. locke 's book of food values has been of much value in making up these diets .
respecting growth requires decisions based on values .
some half-crowns have a plain shield of the royal arms , crowned ; fourpence , threepence , twopence , and penny , values crowned .
assuming that the money-unit is fixed in value , variations in prices in the fluid market correctly indicate variations in values .
this should be all changed in future grants of power-rights in flowing water ; a census of the nation 's water-power resources should be taken , and all grants hereafter should be determined , with the respective values of the same , for use at equitable rates .
-- _london review._ '' worthy of a place in any library whose owner values originality and unconventional treatment of out-of-the-way themes . ''
then he evolved his own theory of values ; and beside all these high matters he would also occupy himself with the most prosaic and humble affairs , such as new methods of doing the washing , boiling potatoes , or making shoes .
this study of values is a distinguishing feature of modern art .
the only remedy in sight is for an investment of capital in up-to-date houses of various grades in city , suburbs , and country ; such investment to bring 4 per cent , not 40 , or even 15 , unless by rise of land values .
so we see how the school confuses its conception of values .
to get quantum computing from this , all you do is replace the classical probabilities which sum to 1 with complex numbers whose squared absolute values sum to 1 .
totalitarian - a government that seeks to subordinate the individual to the state by controlling not only all political and economic matters , but also the attitudes , values , and beliefs of its population .
big names.= -- another element of news values is the interest in prominent people .
i am not looking for ethical or poetic values .
the nutritional values vary by flavour , however chocolate , strawberry , banana , vanilla malt , iced coffee are similar .
initial values that are chosen slightly off the true solution may lead to singularities or breakdown of the ode solver method .
then a lookup for matching soundex values on the new article page .
the film is the conflict between sivakumar and rajini on values of life .
some values for cubes of small size are given below .
the high prices of goods in such a situation represent the concentration of future values into the present , an increase in the motivating power which stimulates the people to unwonted exertions .
they did wonderfully up to their stage and they were very important in overcoming some of the problems with traditional values and scientific materialism .
it has doggedly promoted non-racial and liberal values and sensible economic policies .
`` i yield to no one in my appreciation of outtime art -- you all know how devotedly i collect objects of art from all over paratime -- but our own artists should endeavor to express their artistic values in our own artistic idioms . ''
the new zealand historic places trust has recognised its heritage values with category one registration , indicating a place of ' special or outstanding historical or cultural heritage significance or value ' .
in general , with a common measure of values , dealers need bear in mind only ( n - 1 ) prices .
there is , then , no absorption where values are conserved , but an ever richer content of experience , an ever deepening insight into its significance , and an ever keener enjoyment of the material it affords .
each generation has the responsibility to help future generations in understanding human relationships , eco-environment , fair trade values and growing with creative ideas for effective solutions .
it was then proposed that the article providing for the proportion of requisitions should be changed so as to be based not upon land values but upon population , in estimating which slaves should be counted at three-fifths of their number .
in the storeroom a system is maintained which records quantities without prices ; in the cost department a record of values and quantities may be kept .
i've turned that thousand-dollar fund into fifty , and as near as i can figure it property values along our main street have been jumped about eight hundred per cent .
finite floating-point numbers are ordered in the same way as their values ( in the set of real numbers ) .
franklin frazier , and attacked old values and outlooks on race .
a tabulated list of values is useless where prices fluctuate .
in november 2009 , the town imposed a requirement of adherence to " jewish and zionist " values as a condition of residence .
the cartesian tree for a sequence may be constructed in linear time using a stack-based algorithm for finding all nearest smaller values in a sequence .
wildfire risk is the chance that a wildfire will start in or reach a particular area and the potential loss of human values if it does .
the catch is that the values of i given do not completely fill the domain .
`` which he truly values , '' interrupted lady st. eval .
`` oh , he values himself on being a thorough gentleman—a man of the nicest honor , '' said levy with a sneer .
if there is no matching store , the load accesses the memory system as usual ; any preceding , matching stores must have already retired and committed their values .
his family and the community provided many life experiences which aided in the characters , values , area , and human-interest stories of his books , movies , and television series .
yet a close observer would have noticed that he grasped these tasks only as problems , treated them in their mathematical and enigmatical aspect , and solved them without any appreciation of their concrete values .
( 5 ) the figures of the accompaniment , though reproduced in uniform rhythmic values and melodic direction , undergo constant modifications in pitch and in shape , similar , to those shown in ex .
it is a habit of mind , a test of values , a strengthening of one's faith in the essential soundness and goodness of creation .
the sets for other values of d also show fractal images when they are plotted on the complex plane .
for convenience , any model parameters are not indicated in the notation here and several different treatments of these are possible , including setting them to fixed values as a step in the calibration or treating them using a bayesian analysis .
because the museum 's acquisition of the chariot in 1903 predates by six years italy 's first laws restricting export of items that carry " cultural and artistic values , " the chariot 's sale was legal at the time of purchase , though debated by the contemporary press .
but values are fluctuating things ; and he may always have in hand some venture which , though it can not be specified , may alter the whole situation .
when consulting the pip cards , the sevens have peculiar and occult values , marking the boundaries between those lower and higher .
the fund provides support for organizations in colorado to demonstrate that lgbt people share the same values and are committed to working together with all coloradans to build a better colorado .
he knows right values .
moral values had been so perverted that it took a strong man to hold fast to the rudimentary distinctions between good and evil .
the land speculator would disappear , together with the opportunity of making and losing fortunes by gambling on the changes in land values .
yet we , coming from our own state of things , can understand how the greek values himself upon being a man , and upon having a part in the efficient action of the commonwealth .
therefore a picture is not necessarily `` well painted '' if it possesses the `` values '' of which the french so constantly speak .
good judgment is a sense of respective or proportionate values .
given this simplified equation , one can calculate some values of interest .
on figure 1 the average values for color of 32 series are mapped to show the geographic variation of color .
otherwise , the player wins only if his total card values exceed those of the dealer .
turbulent flow can be found at higher re values , where the boundary layer separates and creates a wake , and laminar flow can be found at lower re values , when the boundary layer separation is delayed , reducing wake and kinetic energy loss to opposing water momentum .
humanistic naturalism is the branch of philosophical naturalism wherein human beings are best able to control and understand the world through use of the scientific method , combined with the social and ethical values of humanism .
it values the husk more than the kernel .
will rogers phenomenon when moving an element from one set to another set raises counter-intuitively the average values of both sets .
hence the obstacles which the surrounding world placed in the way of personal endeavour were inevitably felt the more deeply in proportion as the values of the narrower community life disappeared .
statistical methods values of oxygen consumption , evaporative water loss , and body temperature were plotted as a function of chamber air temperature .
in 2008 , kosmas campaigned on issues such as fiscal conservatism , support for veterans , and values like integrity and transparency .
sik guru further in attempt to achieve zero competition in its sector , by documenting it 's change and the plan of change base on achievable archive of practices , principles and values ; hence , " competitors " can choose to respond at anytime permitted .
the tolerance of device values is arranged so that every value corresponds to a preferred number , within the required tolerance .
it's jolted her sense of values .
he said that during the last seventeen years he had devoted much attention to the photogenic or illuminating values of different qualities of paraffin oils in various lamps , and to the production of permanent illuminating gas from such oils .
never had her tact , her knowledge of human nature , her keen realization of political values been called into such play as now .
the tension between the demands of military security and the values of american liberalism can , in the long run , be relieved only by the weakening of the security threat or the weakening of liberalism .
this psychology offers more values for practical pedagogy than the physiological psychology of the present .
he showed that scientists have their own values , and that these values impact their research .
he crossed the dark open space , still brooding , his eyes fixed on the patch of white light ahead , his mind engaged in a completely unaccustomed examination of values .
it is curious to note his own estimate of the relative values of these two portions of his work .
stibarsen has the same crystal structure as arsenic and antimony , with the intermediate values of the lattice parameters .
while specific values differ , the concepts in this article generalize to any major planet .
contemporary poet sanusi pane contested alisjahbana 's pro-western stance in the novel , noting that it was dangerous to unthinkingly adopt western values ; he argued that the best way to enter modernity would be to combine western materialism with eastern spiritualism .
a sink ( a node with no outgoing edge ) receives all the values and compute their minimum .
thus far , of the effect of the progress of society on the permanent or average values and prices of commodities .
liberal values and existentialist philosophy as expounded by immanuel kant , søren kierkegaard , jean-paul sartre , albert camus etc .
the values of aegl are determined for times of exposure like ten minutes , thirty minutes , one hour , four hours and eight hours .
our age especially needs men and women who think in terms of spiritual values , who rise above the measures of pounds and dollars and weigh life by personal qualities and worth .
this embourgeoisement of german social life was greater than in britain and france , which in the opinion of eley and blackbourn was more distinctly marked by aristocratic values than was germany .
prose. -- why is it said that mrs. stowe showed a knowledge of psychological values ?
precious stones , therefore , are heaven-ordained symbols of what mankind values most highly -- power over other folks ' labour , time , life , happiness , and honour .
the utilities which come into equilibrium are not subjective-exchange-values , which , as schumpeter , with wieser , contends , are the only subjective values money has , but are real subjective use values -- marginal utilities .
the first socialists drew many of their principles from christian values ( see christian socialism ) , against the bourgeois values of profiteering , greed , selfishness and hoarding .
“ you behaved as becomes a man who values his honor , perhaps too hastily , but we won ’ t go into that .
in order to provide a wide range of measurement and maximum accuracy , ratio coils or multipliers having values of 1 , 10 , 100 , 1,000 and 10,000 are provided .
but when , after minutely checking his calculation , he had become sure of their asserted values , he believed .
coffee and tea have no food values except for the milk and sugar added .
the mission of the ussa is to provide strong leadership that establishes and supports athletic excellence in accordance with ussa core values .
i venture the prophecy that it will not lack for them later when the time comes for the inevitable rearrangement of present poetic values .
bus encoding aims to reduce the hamming distance between 2 consecutive values on the bus .
in sections in which the values of land have not been doubled , as in illinois and in indiana they have , the same exodus from the farm and invasion of the country community by new people has taken place .
the philosophy of beauty is a theory of values 14 § 2 .
find values of red , lighter and darker than the middle value already familiar .
they are the values which are the needs and rights of all .
our mission is to ensure our students have the desire for learning and provide them with the knowledge , skills and values to become contributing citizens of the world .
string objects are immutable , which means that once created , their values cannot be changed .
skyscraper values !
if the two values conform to each other , then the parallel-implementation is said to be decomposition-independent .
lp-type problems such as this one in which each lp-type element is determined by a -tuple of input values , for some constant .
the sole criterion of political values is strength .
through the academic programs and the research activity conducted here , the faculty of political sciences intends to develop the political science field of study and other related subjects and also to promote the democratic and civic values of the romanian society .
this would have necessitated demolishing all of the buildings between colmore row and waterloo street , but fell victim to increasing land values and awareness of conservation issues in the 1970s .
to the difficulties of an introduction to a musical instrument are added those of learning to read notes , to locate them , to appreciate time values and much else .
regression lines for three groups of animals in summer extrapolate to zero metabolism at values equivalent to , or greater than , normal t_ { b } ; 38.8°c for trapped males , 37.6°c for captive males , and 41.1°c for captive females ( table 5 ) .
but he loves life and earth and homely words , he is very candid and revealing , and he has a sense of real values .
but if you want to tackle the problem from first principles , i would start out by finding a recurrence relation for f ( m , n ) for small fixed values of m .
the majority of property owners may be absentee landlords , whose values or incentives may not be aligned with the tenants ' .
both of these can be output as comma separated values files , allowing the user to use other software such as matlab or excel for quantitative analysis .
a man who values his own honour , or the dignity proper for the female whom he addresses to assume , will by no means admit of this plurality of lovers , any more than the laws will admit of a plurality of husbands .
many geometricians have studied the subject , and lagrange has published in the _mémoires de turin_ a beautiful method for determining these mean values when the law of the errors of the observations is known .
so that it is evident that we must not be schematic in considering this question , and must realize that a table of antiscorbutic values , such as accompanies this text ( table 3 ) , does not furnish definite and inflexible values .
her answer showed plainly that her method of study was doubly wrong ; for she not only offended against relative values in learning the month and day while forgetting the century , but she revealed no tendency to associate whitney 's invention with any particular period of history .
also , depending on what you count as the " costs " , you could get some very different values .
there is one thing which , it may seem , i have overlooked , in attributing these industrial depressions to the speculative advance of rent or land values as a main and primary cause .
no distinction is more important for any one who wishes to maintain a correct scale of values than that between what is merely recreative and what ministers to leisure .
all of the integer values are stored in little-endian format ( i .
they consist of a key-value pairs , where the values are columns .
assigning point values is one way of determining whether one package is , on the whole , more appealing than another .
jiangxi people or jiangxinese ( 贛人 , gonnin ) believe in the bottom-line chinese values of " family solidarity " , " courtesy " and " saving face " that carry significant weight in the culture .
the proof requires that values f on the other vectors are less or equal .
we assume that the preferred directions of criteria values are known .
these results again agree well with the values given by the kinetic theory of gases .
this is the modular sum of the values taken by the simple checksum as each block of the data word is added to it .
you learn more of france in a week at brantôme than in a year at paris , because here there ’ s nothing to confuse your sense of values .
the global interest association ( gia ) seeks to cultivate and promote an understanding and appreciation of the contributions , values , views , and traditions of diverse cultures from around the world .
we are now in a position to estimate the respective values , as moralising influences , of the path of self-realisation and the path that leads to `` results . ''
every morning the buyers take out as many tickets of these three values as they think they can use , and are charged with the same by the book-keeper .
this term has nothing to do with the use of the word { flag } to mean a variable that has two values .
the bedford springs were believed to have various and diverse medicinal values due to each spring 's unique mix of minerals .
if your study is not sure of its values , it will weaken the results you should get from it later .
still committed to its rich heritage and as one of the five campuses of antioch university , antioch university los angeles is committed to the core values of social justice , service to community , and lifelong learning .
drumming is a powerful tool for teaching and instilling these principles , and putting across the relevance of universal values such as tolerance , the ability to listen to one another , and mutual respect and understanding .
rather they endeavor to convince their opponent that it would be desirable to change his policy because the change would be in his own best interest , or would actually maintain his own real standard of values .
holcomb , for example , sees the novel as endorsing a black transnationalist view , as lucy refuses to be constrained by " colonial , racist , and transnational values " of either antigua or the us .
for a moment she was not a solid block in the structure of our respectable american civilization—she was a rebellious child , delightedly come into a dream world where all burdens are lifted , all values transvalued .
we must finally appeal to philosophy ; we must have recourse to ideal values -- to a non-scientific or super-scientific principle .
under the auspices of the muftiate , volunteers called davatchi visited villages in the south to teach traditional islamic values .
the register content can be regarded as signed or unsigned integer values , or as 32-bit floating point numbers .
claassens and mnisi argue that there is a need to combine the flexibility and inclusiveness underlying indigenous systems of relative land rights with constitutional values such as equality .
this last formula can be adapted to the many-variable situation by replacing the absolute values with norms .
many of the values which we prize most highly to-day need the soil of culture and of a complex civilization before they will flourish .
elisa detection of viruses in these potatoes is difficult and absorbance values may fall below the set cut-off value .
the ethical values of individual conduct may be thus characterized as those which are awakened in man , when he places himself , with his wishes and actions , before the tribunal of the eternal and inscrutable .
he had lived a rough , hard life , in which values were computed by the rule of sheer worth -- a life that had taught him that performance , and not appearances , must be the standard by which all men and women must ultimately be judged .
to a certain extent , the composition of all fruits is the same , but the varieties of this food differ in their food values almost as greatly as do vegetables .
sabumaniacs , as they are called , are much less civilized than the average hulkamaniac , and do not follow morals and values quite as socially acceptable as hulk hogan 's infamous " demandments " ( saying prayers , taking vitamins , etc ) .
they could be used with all confidence to lead us back to the concrete values for which they stood and to the relations which they enabled us to state and discover .
they lived in complete harmony with nature ; they had no spiritual life , no history , for civilisation and the creation of intellectual values which are the foundation of history depend on the rise of a community above primitive conditions .
for example , the state _ based domain defines the concept of state and next state without constraining the values or properties .
in its most formal manifestations , examples such as the traditional christian and muslim prohibitions on usury represent the limits imposed by religious values on economic activity , and as such are part of the moral economy .
other critics such as black feminists and postcolonial feminists assert that mainstream liberal feminism reflects only the values of middle-class white women and has largely ignored women of different races , cultures or classes .
it is found in two thicknesses , which have the same appearance , and seems to have been employed for all the values except the 12d .
then he is made aware of other sorts of values involved in the act performed -- values incompatible with just the value at which he aimed .
although trans fats are present , the nutrition labels round the values down to zero .
`` the machines have no intelligence , no sense of values ; they will obey us just as readily as they obey the enemy . ''
it has brought about remarkable changes in the values of eastern produce .
the tempo of the album is picked up by the opening vamp of " back home " , which contains the concept of family and its positive values .
parameter values are often equalled to spoken language phonemes , although sign language phonemes allow more simultaneity in their realization than phonemes in spoken languages .
but when it comes to mrs. tax-collector and mrs. organist and mrs. head master , and it does come to this quite seriously , it is difficult for the foreigner to appraise values .
everywhere , in some way values and solutions were put into the service of the war .
early realty values .
as real estate values increased , the residential homes north of bloor along yorkville were converted into high-end retail , including many art galleries , fashion boutiques and antique stores , and popular bars , cafes and eateries along cumberland street and yorkville avenue .
by adding thinner to the medium one could work subjects from their darkest value to their lightest values .
analysis showed water level pollutant content was two to seven times greater than permissible " environment limit values for waste water discharge " set by the lebanese ministry of environment .
weinberger also unsuccessfully opposed the construction of the embarcadero freeway saying it would ruin the view of the bay and damage property values .
not every currency has to have all possible nominal values that can exist , not even all nominal values that are commonly used .
the speakers at the conference were invited to discuss the differences between social and natural sciences and the status of values in the social sciences .
in science , a parameter space is the set of all possible combinations of values for all the different parameters contained in a particular mathematical model .
if the latter , applying a linear function to remap pixel values ( e .
there are a number of plates of these stamps , of different values , and each containing ten varieties .
three further values arrived on the day the post office closed , and were never issued .
thenceforth , forevermore , it was lincoln 's living hope that all mankind might peacefully agree to supremely cherish and mutually respect those human values that human unfriendliness , and centuries of contempt , however deeply they may obscure , can never obliterate .
it faced negative reaction from family organizations and social workers , who complained that it promoted sex outside marriage and undermined family values , offering an unsavory image of madonna as a whore .
but when the innkeeper had taken his departure no further word was said by the nobleman of securities or values ; lord ronsdale gazed keenly at his companion .
we have run into some unusual ones , however , which give us higher values , but very few which give us smaller values , except in selected lots of ammunition .
and the second problem means : what schematizations of the wishes of the individual members of the group will produce the desirable social values , promote the organization and culture of the society ?
on brittle materials these values are often so close as to be indistinguishable , so is it usually acceptable to only calculate the ultimate safety factor .
human values , therefore , can be standardized only relatively .
this excellent charge delocalization combined with the high number of oxygen atoms ( four ) and high electronegativity of the central chlorine atom leads to perchloric acid being one of the strongest known acids ( with pka values cited in the range of -7 .
data ( , , or ) is a set of values of qualitative or quantitative variables ; restated , pieces of data are individual pieces of information .
thus , the relative values of services are misjudged and the recompense of labor is not properly graded and proportioned .
humidities are closely tied to rainfall patterns , with the highest values occurring on windward slopes and the lowest in sheltered areas .
these values are : -- trimethylene .
not all can give values value !
at the proper time , the motor—controlled by the cc & s—ignited and burned for 27.8 seconds , while the spacecraft ’ s acceleration was compared with the predetermined values by the accelerometer .
when z has one of the values thus determined , 2 - j1 ( z ) = j0 ( z ) .
they fail to realize that these concepts themselves arise from a subjective set of values , different for every social group on the basis of its own tradition and for every individual on the basis of his own experience and training .
the `` measure of values '' function , and the `` standard of deferred payments '' function , need not require the actual use of money , and need not add to the value of money .
strings literal values can also be used for the case values .
it is because i believe that the accusation is often only too well merited that i have endeavored to show as well as circumstances permit how universal is the scope of the doctrine based upon the facts of biology , and how supreme are its practical and dynamic values .
ranks and point values of cards are as shown in the table above for " most modern games " .
in the mathematical field of dynamical systems , an attractor is a set of numerical values toward which a system tends to evolve , for a wide variety of starting conditions of the system .
messrs. marks and davis have used the values as determined by knoblauch and jacob with slight modifications .
generally , each entity type described in a database has its own table , the rows representing instances of that type of entity and the columns representing values attributed to that instance .
we can not retain the unity of our national consciousness unless we can keep , even in the midst of all the complications and doubts of the modern world , our sense of the great common values of the spiritual world .
i know that these are the values for print ( newspapers etc ) but for computer screens i don 't know .
in 1981 , a new serie of banknotes was issued in values of 100 , 200 , 500 , 1000 and 5000 cruzeiros .
a separate article is not necessary for each issue of new values .
`` you now perceive , '' he continued , as edwin obstinately remained silent , '' that nothing can be more offensive to a man whose principal maxim is frankness and honesty , than to have those whose opinions he values believe him an intriguer .
the home-bred appetite cries out for `` mother 's cooking , '' with no more idea of its nutritive values than has a child .
intermediate elements of the algebra correspond to truth values other than " true " and " false " .
one of the many artificialities of the situation had been a progressive inflation of rent values .
i gave her her wedding-gown , of finest muslin , suitable to her condition , with plenty of lace and ribbons , which the poor child values highly , and i dressed her hair ( poor manuela !
a treatise on the values of foods , their application to special conditions of health and disease , and on the best methods of their preparation .
here , then , we arrive at knowledge , the genuine values of experience , by this same balancing of opposites .
the order in which the enumeration values are given matters .
our apperception of form varies not only with our constitution , age , and health , as does the appreciation of sensuous values , but also with our education and genius .
his fortune was the result of saving as well as the increase in real-estate values .
such a result is difficult to interpret because the experiment cannot essentially distinguish very small values of s from the background-only hypothesis , and thus declaring that such small values are excluded ( in favor of the background-only hypothesis ) seems inappropriate .
seems a well contrasted image to me - rgb values range from near black to near white .
i would not advise a young entomologist to try this experiment , however , if he values the pupæ he possesses , for direct sunlight is undoubtedly very harmful to many species , and perhaps it is to all .
so if one cannot conduct a study and receive similar results with similar conditions , the initial results are not really statistically significant -- even p values less than 0 .
the two critical values τd , 0 and τv , 0 are considered material constants independent of the shape of the volume of material considered and the induced loading , but dependent on the strain rate and temperature .
derived from mass values using molar mass of 88 .
in accordance with social expectations , similarity to the social group and adoption of their organizational scheme and values is characteristic of interpersonal cultures .
“ in reply also to the prevalent opinion that ‘ short selling ’ unduly depresses security values , it should be stated that ‘ short sellers ’ are frequently the most powerful support which the market possesses .
one of the chief values favored by many long-time internet users and experts , as well as by many members of the public , is the free exchange of ideas .
there is no implied relationship between the values .
aside from its impact on the individual , some authors argue that information pollution and information overload can cause loss of perspective and moral values .
wages affect values , only if different in different employments ; “ non-competing groups. ” § 3 .
it teaches jewish values , history , and traditions .
combinational logic gates can be joined manually to map n-bit address input onto arbitrary values of m-bit data output ( a look-up table ) .
very low values of rsh will produce a significant reduction in voc .
in order that the atomic theory should be fruitful of results , it was now necessary that the values of the atomic weights of many elements should be carefully determined .
if you look at a velasquez , you will find that he knew values , even though he did not use the word .
after the dishes were safely stowed away , angela was induced to give her place , in the first car , to mr. fabian , so that he could talk to the other girls about the relative values of china .
if we can acquire this new idea , we shall have absolute value ; and a table of values , such as was called for in the memoir read to the academy of sciences , will be possible .
and the function of values is the function of _motivation_ .
in science , in art , in literature , everywhere the influence of anarchist thought is creating new values ; its spirit is vitalizing social movements , and finding interpretation in life .
the bottom of this dialog should show a recommended value and actual values .
6 values of letter writing stonestudy particularly is a shop for writers .
high property values , very high median family incomes , and high education levels have made carlsbad one of the wealthiest communities in california and in the united states .
two years later all this shore was ravaged by the sons of harold ; and in the domesday record , made eighteen years afterwards , we still can trace their handiwork in the lessened values of villages they had plundered .
for such an orifice l. j. weisbach found the following values of the coefficients with different heads .
curiously enough , it even had something to do with what has ( carefully weighing values ) been called her fundamental honesty ; though here , as so often with her , the true spring was not involved .
the accessories are justly rendered and the values well preserved -- the texture of the stuffs , the ring on the hand , the hand delicate and characteristic ; in short , this is an excellent example of dignified portraiture .
every review noted the historical significance of the information , and those that noticed found the production values high , but the presentation of history mainly too dry , even resembling a lecture .
her research and publications are in the areas of everyday caring , outcomes of caring in nursing , nursing values , nursing home management , and affectional touch .
it said that various measurement values were indeterminate until they were first measured and thereafter all future measurements would come back the same .
a cambridgeshire `` inquisition '' of 1313 values each job at a halfpenny , so that the day 's work of a `` villain '' was worth about threepence .
here we have different values rather than contrasted tones .
god has made our opportunity infinite by giving us an eternal standard of values , -- that is all .
the play consists in tossing the large piece into the air and piercing it with the stylus , different values being assigned to the different holes .
to apportion their respective values to the individual parts of them is a difficult task .
the values too in a charcoal drawing are not true for this reason , because the most delicate light greys are lost ; neither do we like the texture it gives .
wms combines the culture , values and philosophy of marketing to trigger behavioral and attitudinal change in human society by engaging best minds from the world of business , research and politics .
it is expected to obtain for the whole community all future increases in land values , and to wipe out the speculative , as distinguished from the revenue-producing value of land .
real values , for actual use , seemed to be forgotten .
teledirect trains its employees in the values of initiative , teamwork , creativity , and integrity .
franzen suggests that the writing that shares the most political agency and aesthetic dignity would embody the values of expressive language , and urging the reader to look beyond appearances .
parameters values are almost never individually taken , but are at best averages across a production run , due to inevitable manufacturing variations .
the new zealand revenue stamps can be used for postage , but i fancy very few high values are really used for that purpose .
effective spans are taken at moderate values , and all exaggeration is avoided .
thus , we witness the painful inversion of values which has taken place during the past fifty years .
bold type as used here is possibly unnecessarily forceful , but when color is to be shown in its true values it is desirable .
csc is similar to csr except that values are read first by column , a row index is stored for each value , and column pointers are stored .
in karlsruhe , dubbed the mecca of tram-train ( with values of 2 .
the social process : values and institutions .
in one sense , it is purely a property of an oriented link diagram and assumes integer values .
matthew arnold considers literature a `` criticism of life , '' and he values a work with reference to the moral significance of its ideas .
america on the other hand values .
strategic human resource development , where training and development are adjusted to the strategies , objectives and values of the individual organization .
she found dick gordon sitting beside his rival 's bed amiably discussing with him the respective values of the silver doctor and the jock scott for night fishing .
the emerald shade brought out all the values of her coloring , the faint rose of her complexion , the daffodil gold of her flaxen hair .
by the 1969 , the commission had assigned uncertainties to all atomic-weight values .
in fact , the level of in the biosphere has varied significantly and as a result the values provided by the equation above have to be corrected by using data from other sources .
the global centre for pluralism ( ) is an international centre for research , education and exchange about the values , practices and policies that underpin pluralist societies .
from astronomical timekeeping ] n. the time and date corresponding to 0 in an operating system 's clock and timestamp values .
lacking a consistent political philosophy , it combined pseudo-socialist slogans with conservative social values , monarchism , nationalism and theravada buddhist teachings .
and all of these classes of wishes are general mental attitudes ready to express themselves in schemes of action which utilize and are dependent upon the existing social values .
they also ignited a passion to define his values and integrate them into his life , his art , and his society .
the logical hexagon ( also called the hexagon of opposition ) is a conceptual model of the relationships between the truth values of six statements .
much was left to the individual caprice of observers , who selected for the several `` elements '' of reduction such values as seemed best to themselves .
he was known for his promotion of traditional values and a cossack cultural revival .
for philosophers in the anglo-american analytical tradition statements involving moral values have caused concern because of their similarity to statements about objects and events in the physical world .
it has incorporate also in its own being the surprise of aesthetic values -- the sudden joy of light , the gracious wonder of tone and form .
as he values these far more highly than others in which we are interested , as well as he , let us without regret leave this business of the palate to him .
and the biggest is wild speculation , even by so-called experts , none of whom ( especially when looking at assets ) can really accurately predict things like transfer values .
the values and outlook of that patriarchal age , in its constant reiteration , come to form the religious subconscious , affecting present-day relations between men and women .
two years later occurred an incident the humorous values of which the _evening post_ did not miss .
the cost of values of the roots of the forest is indeed the minimal number of violated constraints in the forest for these given values .
it was easy to bet beads against beads and skins against skins , in a simple game of odd or even , but when the element of different values for different combinations was introduced , some medium of exchange was needed to relieve the complications .
i hear mrs. norton is enjoined , as she values the favour of the other family , not to correspond either with you or with me -- poor creatures ! -- but they are your -- yet they are not your relations , neither , i believe .
thus for relative humidities between 40 and 50 mean values were 0.306 for i+ and 0.219 for i- ; whilst for relative humidities between 90 and 100 the corresponding means were respectively 0.222 and 0.134 .
i have traced some slight inflections which i think beyond a doubt modify the values of their sounds .
certainly in the great open reaches of the farther west the horse became man ’ s most valuable property , the unit of all recognized current values .
but with negative values possible , minus four comes before minus three .
there is no obtrusive piety , no patronizing air , nothing to offend the pride of the poor man who values his self-esteem , yet all the influences of the place are elevating .
client code specifies the constraints to be maintained , and the solver updates the constrained variables to have values that satisfy the constraints .
barclays claimed that bear stearns knew that certain assets in the bear stearns high-grade structured credit strategies enhanced leverage master fund were worth much less than their professed values .
in what it values most -- the love of god 1814 .
but i disputed with him over the outrageous difference between prices and values , till i quite disabused him of the notion , and he settled down to drive a hard bargain with a hard customer .
so that the best quality was numbered `` 1 '' and the worst numbered `` 10 , '' and all the other numbers of graduating values .
in 1961 , associations and federations of popular education of the moselle , mobilized around common values ( " to allow each citizen to be an actor of the transformation of a company where the man finds finally his true place " ) .
there are over a million acres of arid lands in the plains of the big horn and yellowstone basins , with favorable soils and potential farm values if water can be made available for irrigation .
the inference seems to be that mankind , on the whole , values happiness more highly than life .
i think it explodes the bubble , of the opponents of racial values , that they are merely myths .
is it our disregard of the artist 's message which makes us so blind and so stupid , or are we so under the influence of our _zeitgeist_ that we can detect only commercial values in the young as well as in the old ?
many medieval muslim thinkers pursued humanistic , rational and scientific discourses in their search for knowledge , meaning and values .
one other consideration bearing on values has been at least suggested by the study of the cincinnati suspension bridge .
land values have doubled in much of this region during the past five years ; though prices are still so much below those prevailing in missouri , iowa , minnesota , ohio , illinois , and indiana that the inrush from those states continues to be large .
`` depreciation in values , of course .
fundamentally , this action marked a formal recognition of the need to protect and manage wildlife resources for their renewable values .
it is pleasing to note how brazil , belgium , and france , all imitated great britain in the colour and values of their first issues ; it is also an interesting coincidence that the earliest labels of all these countries , great britain included , were extremely short-lived .
we had no values in excess of 2 degrees , and many values were less than 1 degree in yaw , indicating that the round is quite stable .
it is by the powers of appreciation gained in dynamic states of consciousness , we may believe , rather than by discoveries and an accumulation of data that we shall be most certain of finding true values , and the way of extrication from our present grave doubts .
in fact , he may be described as an intuitive artist—as that type of artist whose feeling is like the divining rod which leads down to shafts of golden values and who does not obfuscate his mind with intellectual conceptions of what or how he should create .
and just as the individual seeks a vicarious self-preservation through identifying himself with his children and his race , and finds compensation for his own death in their continuance , so he rejoices when he knows that men who come after will appreciate the values of his life .
`` that is true , '' said don quixote ; `` but my squire values them at the rate he says , as having been given me by the person who gave them . ''
the austrian empire at the time was governed ( like most of europe ) by the system of hereditary aristocracy , which was falling under increasing criticism as the values of the enlightenment spread .
these values had to be solidly supported to make the presentations convincing and acceptable to the farmers and speculators .
tony benn attacked labour listens because he saw it as a means by which the labour leadership would abandon traditional labour values and argued instead that britain needed policies based on conviction espoused by a radical and tolerant socialist party .
individual war values are calculated from the number and success rate of on-field actions by a player ( in batting , baserunning , fielding , and pitching ) , with higher values reflecting larger contributions to a team 's success .
born and raised in hamburg , schmidt is regarded in germany as an embodiment of hanseatic values , according to which he has never accepted a medal or an order of merit ( not even the federal republic 's federal cross of merit ) .
natural values are always critically appraised in the light of humane values , which is nearly , if not quite , the same as saying that the individual desires and delights must be conformed to the standards of the group .
obviously , countries that put stamps into circulation by the million can never be a very good investment , so far as their common values are concerned .
the church , moreover , by the mere fact of being an institution , having a hierarchy , an ordered procedure , a definite assignment and division of ecclesiastical labor , becomes thereby an incomparable preserver and transmitter of traditional values .
the form ( figure 18 ) for the `` computation of zenith distance and azimuth of the moon '' illustrates the steps in calculating the values of z_ { 0 } and [ psi ] _ { 0 } .
i recognised its social values , i saw its ordered happiness , but a fever in my blood asked for a wilder course .
the first proof of a murder is the corpse and here are the corpses of murdered values just as they were struck down by the federal reserve bludgeon .
an organization is a complex system of people , procedures , practices , policies , relationships , facilities , values , resources , cultures , services and products , production , activity and transformation .
these beliefs include the stereotype that blacks are morally inferior to white people , and that they violate traditional white american values such as hard-work and independence .
these differences are illustrated by the following figures , those for the crops of the north showing the yield and values for the year 1897 .
the ore had not yet reached a value which would pay to ship it , but the increase of values was so steady , and amos was so extravagantly encouraging , that we were always in buoyant expectation of rich ore .
the figure shown below depicts theoretical characteristic curves for some values of the constant a .
coatrack is concerned , there is clearly an error of mixture of different values represented as one in these tables .
the registering wheels r , r ' rest against the glass sphere and give the values na_n and nb_n .
at different fuel levels , different values of capacitance are measured and therefore the level of fuel can be determined .
a culture that permits science to destroy traditional values but which distrusts its power to create new ones is a culture which is destroying itself .
unlike most classical music , blue notes do not have exact values .
for example , xml may not contain certain byte values and requires a nontrivial combination of escaping and delimiting , while generating multipart mime messages involves choosing a delimiter that must not clash with the content of the data .
the essence of festivals lies in bringing people together and spreading the intrinsic values of their cultures and traditions .
larger values go by weight ; the _aki_ ( _ackie_ ) , [ footnote : the word _aki_ sounds much like the arab _roukkah_ or _roukkiyah_ .
this decision i should deem binding and conclusive upon the subject even if i did not think that the values of business capital and talent are as fairly charges against the receipts of business as the values of a business house or tools .
proudhon has always appealed only to the realisation of the idea through the actual circulation of values on the one hand , and to the law-abiding character of nature on the other .
numerical values in the data are also subjected to outlier analysis , individually , and agglomerated over time periods and over elements of the accounting ontology .
at this point , however , the buckets must carry additional information indicating what data values are present in the bucket .
surface temperatures in the warm sector near the dryline and warm front ranged from and the dew point was , with higher values farther south and increasing over time as the deepening low-pressure area continued to pull up gulf air .
the society of st edmund settled in winooski park , vermont , and established saint michael 's college [ 1 ] in 1904 where the deeds and values of saint edmund 's life continue through fulfilment of the college 's mission .
in a 1992 study , among these there were values that cultures prioritize to varying degrees .
multicells can have high vil values on one radar picture , yet much smaller values in the next radar picture .
we believe it is still possible to pursue different policies that can give iraq an opportunity for a better future , combat terrorism , stabilize a critical region of the world , and protect america 's credibility , interests , and values .
certification values are determined statistically , considering the uncertainties accompanied by international standard ( reference standard ) to which it is traceable , instrument uncertainty , and instability ( reactivity ) of gas in the container .
an alternative is to calculate a busy hour traffic value separately for each day ( which may correspond to slightly different times each day ) and take the average of these values .
he met mr. pendleton in the domain of railroad construction and management , and showed himself familiar with the relative values of pendleton 's own lines .
the stage manager and scene deviser are daily becoming more important factors in the production of a play ; and along with this goes a clearer perception of the values of grouping and regrouping on the part of the plastic elements behind the footlights .
the effort to explain moral values by a single principle , as sympathy , legal values by another simple principle , as fear , and economic values by a different simple principle , as utility , is foredoomed .
cited as " one of the great set-ups of genre drama " , the opening sequence establishes the orwellian and postmodern themes of the series ; its high production values have led the opening sequence to be described as more like film than television .
catalog of passive filter types and component values .
asta values and promotes diversity of membership , in terms of company size , products and geographic area served .
ucs-2 disallows use of code values for these code points , but utf-16 allows their use in pairs .
preceded by those of `` one of cleopatra 's nights , '' they form a body of literary values which should be rescued from the newspaper files and permanently issued in book-form for the pleasure and instruction of english readers .
if we had a higher appreciation of dramatic values we should not call an actor before the curtain .
yes , from this discussion it would seem that my approach is indeed in conflict with the values of the community .
fortunately the very word '' boom , '' in its significance as applied to inflated real estate values , has no meaning in these towns , with the result that they are compact .
further , the children were interviewed and a conclusion was reached that these same troublesome children also possessed less sound moral values .
this narrow view can often fail to incorporate the richness of non-financial values that exist in human cultures and relationships , as well as the non-financial aspects of nature 's functions .
mr. h -- will never know that it 's the _exception_ that proves the rule -- particularly when you are dealing with human values .
very approximate values for the number of days that each planet is visible and invisible during the course of its observational cycle .
alternatively , the 12 monthly values of one climatic element are plotted on the ordinate versus the corresponding monthly values of another climatic element plotted on the abscissa , and the resulting points are connected with a continuous line .
current available values are caldwell biological spectral weighting function , flint biological spectral weighting function , erythemally weighted irradiance , uv-a irradiance , uv-b irradiance and vitamin d .
but barya 's poetry " is an enthusiastic trumpet , subtly blown for the woman in society , unlike lawino 's defence of the traditional african values .
a child ’ s estimate of values may be a false one ; but the child ’ s sorrows over losses measured by those estimates are as real as any one ’ s sorrows .
he saw what modern anarchists and revolutionists do not see -- namely , that man is in danger of actual destruction when his customs and values are broken .
in 1954 , these three values were reissued with the portrait of queen elizabeth ii following her father 's death .
the benefit of using the snowflake schema in this example is that the storage requirements are lower since the snowflake schema eliminates many duplicate values from the dimensions themselves .
in this sense , the lebesgue constant can be viewed as the relative condition number of the operator mapping each coefficient vector u to the set of the values of the polynomial with coefficients u in the lagrange form .
2 , page 151 , is the excavation of earth with wheelbarrows , and the values given are fair averages of actual contract work where the wheelbarrow man fills his own barrow .
no one , however selfish , who had formed any reasonable estimate of the relative values of life , would devote his whole time to the economical exploitation of his neighbours , in order to pile up the instruments of a fuller life , which he will never use .
that is , over a point x , the values are not well-defined because a change in trivialization will multiply them each by a non-zero constant λ .
i am eager to report the glory of the universe : may i be worthy to do it ; to have got through regarding human values , so as not to be distracted from regarding divine values .
neither greece nor rome supply examples , nor did the democratic republic of athens nor the democratic cæsarism of rome ever succeed in giving birth to an aristocracy of competence by a prolonged economy of values .
the terminating values are arbitrary and varied from manufacturer to manufacturer .
these two values of x we call _roots_ .
by means of the epilogue and prologue mr. sheldon gains irony and contrast , relates the main play to larger values , and answers the inevitable question of his audience at the end of his third act : what happened to them afterward ?
the company also offers a line of consumer outerwear constructed with " workwear " values .
they are all carried out in grey monotonous middle tints but marvellously delicate and subtle in values .
staying at pithole too long , values had shrunk to such a degree that he was virtually penniless at his departure from the “ magic city ” in 1867 .
if one side has two characters and the other has only one in one of the team modes , the side with two characters will each have half their respective normal maximum life values .
on the whole , this group consists of either industrially developed centers with negative natural and climatic conditions , or mid-cities of old-cultivated regions , characterized by primarily average values of all indicators .
land values were the subject of a great deal of discussion during the appraisal of 1900 , but subsequent investigations as to actual railroad purchases resulted in quite radical changes in some of the figures in the later valuations .
the school 's vision is to produce women of excellence , equipped with a noble mind , who blend naturally christian values , chinese traditions and culture , democratic ideals and to contribute proactively in the international and local communities as well as their homes and families .
( 74 ) the beloved guardian deeply values the unique and outstanding services of the bahá ’ ís of the british isles .
in standard arrays , each index is restricted to a certain range of consecutive integers ( or consecutive values of some enumerated type ) , and the address of an element is computed by a " linear " formula on the indices .
it had probably four or five different values in the mss. , and might represent _s_ , _z_ , _sh_ , _zh , _ _j_ according to circumstances .
the globalization has resulted into the monopoly of western cultural and ethical values and has undermined the political sovereignty of the nation states .
both the volts and amperes in an alternating circuit are constantly varying between maximum values in opposite directions along the wires .
but , now-a-days , they surmount these obstacles with so much greater facility ; they execute , for instance , the work of transport , of tillage , of manufactures , at so much less an expense of effort that values are considerably reduced .
however no matter how hard she tried , she could not find the values of k that will give the results consistent with her measurements .
interpolation , in the ordinary sense , consists in determining the value of u for a value of x intermediate between two values appearing in the table .
in its history , years have witnessed more life and growth , more progress in business and wealth and the creation of more permanent values of property , than decades in the history of older and admittedly prosperous cities of the eastern states .
in his own time , this conception of confucian values was amongst the factors which led him to draw attention to the need to study and adopt western weapons and tactics , as introduced by the dutch .
at the interface , these values may deviate from those present within the bulk phases .
among the vowel symbols , modern greek sound values reflect the fact that the vowel system of post-classical greek was radically simplified , merging multiple formerly distinct vowel phonemes into a much smaller number .
she never failed of interest in the distribution of food values to her unconscious patrons , and incidentally to collier pratt , or in directing the activities and diversions of sheila .
the future status of mankind upon the earth would be that of vast herds of human _yaharigans_ , probably bred for ever greater bone content as men breed cattle for superior food values .
they are the expression of _society 's preservative measures , _ for they are felt to be almost _beyond question._ the practice -- that is to say , the _utility_ of being agreed concerning superior values , has attained in this respect to a sort of sanction .
the ratio of measured to predicted c_ { mw } for _procyon lotor_ in winter ( 1.15 ) was similar to values calculated for _potos flavus_ ( 1.02 ) and _procyon cancrivorus_ ( 1.25 ) .
the game retains a traditional battle system , where character performance in combat is determined by numerical values for attributes such as health , power , and speed .
if we are not careful , the values that are the very essence of the council of europe will be under direct threat from creationist fundamentalists .
the sanskrit values are used in transliteration ( without the diacritics ) , but these values are never actually used when sanskrit is read out loud in thailand .
see recognized timezone values table .
optional use this to add a modifier before the wind values .
cops of the world " paints a portrait of america as invaders who want to impose their values and ways of life on the world , doing anything they please , expecting everybody else to comply .
he values his reputation as an art connoisseur , you see . ''
in a situation like that , it would be unusual to report other un-corrected p values when such correction would be appropriate .
thus higher land values -- inevitable with an increasing population -- will favor a more permanent type of farming , conducted on scientific and business principles , of what dr. wilson calls the '' husbandman '' type .
look ahead is used to check the effects of choosing a given variable to evaluate or to decide the order of values to give to it .
the various spirits were also fractionally estimated , but this as a class , and not as individuals : the priests would not have known how to have solved the problem if they had been obliged to ascribe values to the infinity of existences .
had there not been some who did pass beyond the _thing and its relations_ the spiritual values of the race would have been annihilated .
relative values are lost , for it is the sense of the disagreeable only that is heightened ; and the world , in this strange disorder of vision , assumes an aspect which can only be compared with that of a drop of impure water under the microscope .
signed q values are stored in 2 's complement format , just like signed integer values on most processors .
but he ’ s a man of great estate , and values nobody. -- act i .
p. 424 the values in the table are inconsistent .
then the owner of the boat opens the shells and takes out the costly pearls , which are of different values , according to their size and other qualities .
in autoregressive models , the output variables depend linearly on its own previous values .
it also applies an external magnetic field to analyze the alignment of the paramagnetic compounds and uses changes in the positive or negative magnetic spin values to detect these changes .
when species diversity values are compared among sets , sampling efforts need to be standardised in an appropriate way for the comparisons to yield ecologically meaningful results .
these quantities vary in different types of engines , but in the absence of more specific data the values in table iii will be found useful .
the real work is condensing , compressing , choosing , changing , shifting words and phrases , -- studying values of colour and sound and form in words ; and when all is done , the result satisfies only for a time .
syriac numbers are written using numerical values which are assigned to letters ( similarly to the gematria system in hebrew ) .
the game could also end prematurely if the pot fell so far below zero that it could not become positive given the possible number of correct answers and dollar values remaining ; this occurred at least once .
he that values himself upon conscience , not opinion , never heeds reproaches .
what he has to learn is the resemblances between the various forms of religion , the differences between them , and the relative values of those differences .
hubert herkomer said once that he did not try for likeness ; if only he got the right values in the right places , the likeness had to be there .
i challenge all our schools to teach character education , to teach good values and good citizenship .
if it is known that key values will always increase monotonically , an alternative approach to consistent hashing is possible .
but `` the values '' are scarcely ever considered in this connection .
julia set for determined values of c ( including c belonging to the boundary of the mandelbrot set ) , the julia set has a dimension of 2 .
the teaching of the languages does not correspond to these secondary values .
`` polygamy and monogamy , as such , have no moral values , for man or superman , '' replied forsythe , speaking to the window .
either way , it does not belong in an encyclopedia that values npov .
it is such a pity that he should feel so , for brightness is nothing ; it is in the heart that the values lie .
swift , in noticing them , tells his correspondent that he values `` his own entertainment beyond the obloquy of a parcel of wretched fools , '' which he `` solemnly pronounces '' to be a fit description of the inhabitants of leicester .
parameters are used with templates , and they are values that you automatically you put in - the important values in the infobox .
first it revealed the internal structure of genvoca values as tuples .
give the average citizen the opportunity of becoming a landlord and of appropriating the land values created by his tenants , and he will embrace it to-morrow .
as he got older , and his genius , lacking its proper outlets , tended to stagnate and thicken , he fell into exaggerations -- exaggerations of power into brutality , of tactile values into feats of modelling .
those linguists who looked upon language as a product of nature were by that very fact precluded from establishing a rational basis for determining linguistic values ; nor is it possible to find one if we look at things from the one-sided point of view of the linguistic historian .
in the following pages will be found a number of diet tables , giving compositions and fuel values of various foods which have been grouped for the sake of convenience , for the foods in each group are quite similar .
philosophy forswears inquiry after absolute origins and absolute finalities in order to explore specific values and the specific conditions that generate them .
rothbard characterized his immigrant father as an individualist who embraced the american values of minimal government , free enterprise , private property , and " a determination to rise by one 's own merits " .
these values are not purely derived from experimental data , but at least partly from systematic trends .
there are several other cases of interdependence to which the new school has drawn attention , as , for example , that of certain complementary goods whose values can not vary independently .
the values above are related to the eu-6 , the founding member states .
i have not graded the different articles of food , but some day when we have more time i will give you a table of nutritive values of different articles of food so that you can form some comparison in your own mind .
within a short time , however , as a few wealthy men began to secure sites for winter residences , the prices suddenly leaped to the full value , and , in many cases , fictitious values , which they have since maintained .
this makes it a question of enormous values .
when coinage is free and gratuitous , these two values are the same .
as a witness to the values against which the ego of these fathers has to struggle , the existence of the conscientious objector , in a less degree of suffering than their own , is as intolerable as their own `` shameful and cowardly '' unconscious longings .
but the environmental sloganeering of the simpsons as well as groening 's cartoon commentary are symptomatic of a hollywood and a popular culture that are hostile to the concerns and values of most americans .
what the frequency principle explains is the effect of varying the distribution of contextual values .
color decisions can influence both direct messages and secondary brand values and attributes in any communication .
the plan is quite different from any before in use , and commends itself to the whole country by the stability it gives to the currency in use in the transaction of its business , and the security it furnishes against loss of values common under the old systems .
for , the depreciation of his curfew stock only shows the immense values of the humanity stock .
banach space and let x be a gaussian random variable taking values in b .
augustine does the same , and later pascal ( `` corrupted reason '' ) , in favour of christian values .
nor in the years immediately subsequent to that of his death did values advance much .
similarly in ( 13 ) , a is regarded as a function of the initial and final values of q1 , q2 , ... q_m , and of the total energy h , with the cyclic momenta invariable .
bit-tree encoding is performed like decoding , except that bit values are taken from the input integer to be encoded rather than from the result of the bit decoding functions .
if we are to restore religious values , rebuild a world of transcendent ends and more-than-natural beauty , we must begin here with man .
the centre seeks to export the canadian experience by promoting pluralist values and practices in culturally diverse societies worldwide .
the supernatural was an allegory of the natural , and rendered the values of transitory things under the image of eternal existences .
the more highly an age or a nation values its individuals , therefore , and the more right and ascendency we accord them , the more will actions of this kind venture to make themselves known , 359-360 .
the values obtained agree , in general , with haber 's contention .
many fairytale fantasies are revisionist , often reversing the moral values of the characters involved .
notice that for specific values of n , the n-pointed magic stars are also known as magic hexagram etc .
companies need to identify the economic reality of their organization based on resources and operations , not reflect dollar values calculated using accrual-based accounting methods that conform to generally accepted accounting principles ( united states ) .
the hasty pudding cipher can also be used to encrypt values in a range that do not translate to strings with an integral number of bits ; for instance , it can encrypt a number from 0 to n by producing another number from 0 to n .
he built many additions to existing churches , and also the church of st augustin , in which he united the structural values of stone and steel .
but when the machinery of justice was placed in the hands of the state , there came a transvaluation of values .
the rhinelanders built great prominence and wealth through their involvement in real estate , as values rose with development , and the shipping industry .
saturday ’ s closing values on pigs were around 25¢ lower for the week .
in it the number of years is specified from which the mean secular change is derived ; in all cases the last year of the period employed was that to which the absolute values assigned to the element belong .
the pixel values are stored in each bit , with the first ( left-most ) pixel in the most-significant bit of the first byte .
a conservation easement is a legal agreement between a landowner and act or a government agency that permanently limits the use of the land to protect its conservation values .
these axes provide scales ( quantitative and categorical ) used to label and assign values to the visual objects .
retail values range from 75c to $ 2.00 each .
he is thoroughly informed concerning realty values and the energy and enterprise which he displays in carrying on his work have constituted the salient forces in the attainment of his success .
bent seems bent upon being very detestable , for he values the books at only seventy pounds .
he was skilled with the pen , but to achieve values by multiplied strokes was foreign to both temperament and training .
one big thing her war experiences had done for mildred thornton , it had given her a new sense of values .
i made an effort to explain to him that american gold coin was not only the supreme standard by which all values were measured in this country , but that as mere metal it was worth the sum stamped upon it in any part of the earth .
jefferson and albert gallatin focused on the danger that the public debt , unless it was paid off , would be a threat to republican values .
a presentiment that our poetic values are chaotic is widespread ; we are uncomfortable with it , and there is , we believe , a genuine desire that a standard should be once more created and applied .
the range of values allowed for each ( except boolean ) is implementation defined .
the aroles raised their three sons and four daughters in the faith of the church of england , inculcating in them christian ethical and spiritual values that have guided rajnikant through a lifetime of public service .
he seemed to hint that nothing but the right “ values ” was of any consequence .
this time the samples yielded even higher values .
to determine the position of the sun and planets , an astronomical ephemeris ( a table of values that gives the positions of astronomical objects in the sky at a given time ) is used , which can then be converted into suitable real-world coordinates .
trade is very greatly and injuriously affected by sudden alterations in the standard of value , especially when the alteration is , as now , towards increased values .
it works with a number of organization in the dc area and abroad in order to promote malawian culture and malawian values and to act as a resource of information on malawi .
following this , in 1870 , came the current series , which at first had values similar to the 1869 series , with the addition of a 7-cent stamp .
she personified the family background , values , dreams and aspirations that the aagplb founders attempted to cultivate , so that her parents insisted on close supervision before permitting her to join the new league .
it is based on an educational curriculum which addresses all aspects of early childhood growth and development , namely physical , moral , emotional , socio-cultural , and intellectual values , as well as the child 's physical environment , whether natural or man-made .
an increase in postal rates resulted in two new values on 6 january 2003 .
the economic process is concerned with values that can be treated as commodities .
or values of $ 29.60 in copper .
derived from mass values using molar mass of 330 .
marine birds continue to provide commercial , subsistence , recreational , scientific , and educational values to people of many nations , while playing critical roles in the economies of the world's oceans .
if you allow complex values , and thus use the complex logarithm , then the logarithm of that first negative number will have an imaginary part of pi , and some real part .
for each set of values , a special public key called a ksv ( key selection vector ) is created .
there is , then , in the monetization of gold and silver something that the economists have given no account of ; namely , the consecration of the law of proportionality , the first act in the constitution of values .
all his essential commonness , his cheap values and squalid assumptions leaped to life .
the value of values !
these values are set out in the highest curve in fig .
fairfax county 's representatives in the convention voted for retaining the county court , arguing that the monthly sessions had significant social values -- an `` heirloom of great psychological importance . ''
vietnam war , and the upheaval of social values at the time " .
the plate for this stamp is stated to have been made up for printing sheets of 100 impressions in ten rows of ten , like the three values of 1851 , and also to have had the eight marginal imprints .
[ 157 ] as to the other diversity , that of kind , lauder saw a proclamation which assessed the values of five hundred coins then current in france .
valid parameter values are dark and light , and , by default , the player will display player controls using the dark theme .
sharing of virtual address space and inter-context communications could be provided by writing the same values in to the segment or page maps of different contexts .
vasavi 's life is worth remembering because of her faith in non-violent religious values and her defense of the status of women .
adding two values is straight forward .
gdp " values seem to exist even though the data comes from reliable sources .
i am only saying that a minority in our population has seen that the allies are fighting to preserve spiritual values which made our own past great , and which alone can make our future worthy .
deviations towards plus and minus values will be correspondingly produced by rarer conditions .
the priest _duarte mendez serraon_ ( a letter of whose _john de laet_ quotes ) values the booty carry ’ d away by the _hollanders_ from _garasu_ , at 9000 l. _sterl._ besides the damage which the place suffer ’ d , being almost ruin ’ d .
but the emotions and ideas of neither exhaust the psychological causation involved in the values .
to mix it properly one must know the proper values of herbs and condiments , and this recipe is the result of much discriminating study .
what is important is that it was the funds of their depositors and others like them which the `` system '' used to turn the stock market and make an immense profit out of the recovery of values .
dark and light values were often contrasted in minoan pottery .
however , it only accepts specific values ( case-sensitive ) as the following table including the expected output .
cultural probes aim to seek out subjective thoughts , values and dreams and surprise and uncertainty is a key value .
he carefully selected his diet with due regard for starch values and never ate a raw tomato without first carefully removing the seeds .
in connection with the experiments with this solution , the interesting fact was observed that the sensibility for blue was greatly reduced in the brom-gelatine film , while green and yellow appeared in their true color values .
below the values of 1865 .
in all the estimates and values which he makes of life he is fixedly regarding the soul .
he wished finally to realise the _umwerthung aller werthe_ ( he found this formula ) , `` the transvaluation of all values . ''
5.17.17 12 caban 5 kayab 9.19.18.12.17 12 caban 5 kayab an examination of these values will show that the sixth in the list , 9.14.13.4.17 , is very close to the number recorded in our text , 9.14.12.4.17 .
cairns was first to see , for he had been told , and he brought to the meeting all the fresh inspirations of his maturity , and they rested upon the solid values earned through a life of hard-held decency .
some are very close to integers , but i think that this is only true for a finite number of values for n .
in mathematics , particularly in functional analysis , a projection-valued measure ( pvm ) is a function defined on certain subsets of a fixed set and whose values are self-adjoint projections on a fixed hilbert space .
spencer is also the home of the spencer pride festival , an annual event celebrating shared values of both lgbtq and straight communities .
return attribute types only , not attribute values .
nietzsche teaches that nothing is stable , -- not even values , -- not even the concepts good and evil .
having obtained the mean daily temperature for each day of a month , the average of these values gives us the mean monthly temperature .
being not only deprived of their liberty , which an indian values above all things , but also compelled to accompany an enemy going against their families and friends , they could now no longer conceal their resentment .
for example , the period one orbit only appears for values of c around 4 and is never found again in the bifurcation diagram .
the farmers suffered because of low market prices for farm products , low land values , bank failures , and crop failures .
religion at present is confronting the problem of whether it will be able to take up into itself the newer ethical values -- the scientific spirit which seeks truth , the enhanced value of human worth which demands higher types of social justice .
therefore , it is helpful to use different words to describe states having uncertain values and states having definite values ( eigenstates ) .
such were the fundamental values which napoleon had in mind when he said that those who would learn the art of war should study the great captains .
earth impactors and 2014 aa had small earth moid values as they were on their impact approach when discovered .
charles was fully conscious that values were different here .
in practice there are many kcq values which are common between different scsi device types and different scsi device vendors .
the 2010 values of 1malaysia as articulated by najib razak are perseverance , a culture of excellence , acceptance , loyalty , education , humility , integrity , and meritocracy .
comparison between the values of assets owned by different entities may be difficult where deprival value is used because it reflects the position of the reporting entity .
on page 8 the winter landscape is in color , and you see the same scene on page 9 in neutral values .
ign 's erik brudvig called deadly premonition " awful in nearly every way " and criticized every aspect of the game , especially its bad production values and lackluster controls .
thus , inputs ' prices ( or values ) and outputs ' prices ( or values ) are necessarily equal .
moshiach oi 's music combines the sound of traditional hardcore punk with lyrics that promote jewish ideals and values .
now substitute these two values into the original equation and rearange and solve for b , then find the derivative .
echoing dryden 's _mac flecknoe_ , tutchin invites dullness and `` immortal _nonsence_ '' to inspire his ironic praise of the folly and knavery that now ride roughshod over such traditional values as learning , love , wit , and patriotism .
the economic results of such collective human labour are expressed as the values and the prices of the commodities ; the value-relations between the amount of human labour and the value of the supplied commodity .
this can lead to an " undershoot " of the membrane potential to values that are more polarized ( " hyperpolarized " ) than was the original resting membrane potential .
this is achieved by a series of input tools that guide the user through the program options , providing context-dependent variable values always that possible .
the check symbol is computed by summing the top and bottom half values separately , modulo 6 , and combining the final sums into a symbol .
drag gibson is an influential landowner who represents the impact of white culture on the west , the rapacious greed of land capitalists , and the rigidity of judeo-christian values .
social reformers like gandhi and the members of very numerous societies in india today are making slow but sure progress in restoring the ancient values of caste , based solely on natural qualification and not on birth .
such impairment is a chief reason advanced for zoning , so that property values in various given districts may not be impaired through inharmonious uses , and that property values throughout a city may thus be stabilized .
every price implies _two_ values , the value of the money-unit and the value of the unit of the good in question .
another criticism of the novel is that it promotes plantation values .
in this technique , it is assumed that every pixel 's intensity values in the video can be modeled using a gaussian mixture model .
milk-mixtures , and the caloric values resulting [ illustration : ready method for selecting amounts to be employed in making various 20–oz .
once adjusted in this way the micrometer values are the same for all the eye lenses of the combination .
then she ’ ll understand , you see. ’ and i half-rose to return to my diminutive study , where i was slaving , just then , at an absorbing article on comparative æsthetic values in the blind and deaf .
the conventional understanding of this phenomenon is the aggregate displacement of lower income residents due to the renovation and revitalization of existing properties that drive up overall property values .
they constructed their forms in color , building them up with layers of modulated values , working generally with a small brush , but one that was fully charged with pigment which was floated on to the surface .
the risk in estimates of the average value of standing ore is dependent largely upon how far values disclosed by sampling are assumed to penetrate beyond the tested face , and this depends upon the geological character of the deposit .
he values himself on his integrity , and is not destitute of benevolence .
if it is known that key values will always increase ( or decrease ) monotonically , then a variation of consistent hashing can be achieved by keeping a list of the single most recent key value at each hash table resize operation .
they recognised the agricultural engagement have more values now above than earlier .
to represent its purpose and ( stated ) values , the corporation adopted the coat of arms , including the motto " nation shall speak peace unto nation " .
strong , middle , and weak chroma ( traced with three values and ten hues ) .
cooperstown is old enough and wise enough to have a juster appreciation of lasting values .
it is given to an individual who exemplifies the values that the late deputy sheriff ford tyson humphrey lived by , and , gave his life for .
a spectrocolorimeter is a spectrophotometer that can calculate tristimulus values .
these are anti-authoritarian and represent a reversal of predominant values of competition and greed .
probably some of the other values will be bought up by other dealers , and the net result will be that a set of columbians will cost $ 75 or $ 100 .
what the cpd sought to harmonize was the methods of test , the methods of declaration of product performance values , and the method of conformity assessment .
there he sought to reconcile the practices of his contemporary generation with the values of torah and judaism .
the rectification and salvation of russia will come from the regions , where the people have saved their communist roots , the sentiment of the past , and family values .
it is as the repository of deep desires and as the appreciation of values that the aesthetic may be most readily seen to be practical , but it performs other functions .
usually in a fiat money the value drops if the coin is converted to metal , but in a few cases the value of metals in fiat moneys have been allowed to rise to values larger than the face value of the coin .
ethics is " moral philosophy " , or the study of values and the analysis of right and wrong .
it is calculable additively from the values of this function for the component atoms , allowance being made for the mode in which they are mutually combined ( see chemistry , physical ) .
but with the dispersal of omanis in the early 1900s and their return in the early 1970s , a more contemporary population of omanis that were influenced by the british colonial values during their time abroad have slowly challenged many traditions of gender segregation .
once the structure is reverse engineered , very complex sql queries are written to pull all the content from multiple tables into an intermediate table or into some type of comma-separated values ( csv ) or xml file .
in a scientific point of view , actual or effective wealth is not the sum of values , but the aggregate of the utilities , gratuitous and onerous , which are attached to these values .
she had sought as studiously as jerry himself to banish the absurd idea that this readjustment of values was sentimental , and she had as signally failed .
when represented in teac ( trolox equivalent antioxidant activity ) , the global antioxidant activity of processed acerola is between minimal and maximal teac values , or vceac ( vitamin c equivalent antioxidant activity ) values .
however , most of these values are estimated from a theoretical chart that may or may not be based on recent average sales prices of a particular make and model .
according to another plan , the index number is the ratio between the following two values : the quantities consumed at the current date at the current prices , and the same quantities at standard prices .
most of these expatriates would be available to develop mainland china , if conditions there were to change in a way that would make them compatible with the values with which these expatriates grew up on taiwan , or with the western democratic values which they absorbed abroad .
it has been seen that , in the case of a single source , this constant can be determined by forming the sum of the squares of the residuals of each equation of condition , when the values found for these elements have been substituted .
the quartz is rich in gold and copper with small values in silver , and carrying iron and copper pyrites more or less throughout it .
as a franciscan learning community , immaculate heart of mary college-parañaque views humanity as a family ; values the integrity of creation and care for mother earth ; works for peace and social justice and generously volunteers services .
when the h influence prevails , i has its highest values at hours when h is least .
she should know about clothes , their cost , wearing qualities and decorative values .
the ebb-tide of the war values had left him among the shoals ; his black curls were full of frost , his bank box was stuffed with plantation mortgages , his notes were protested .
the inevitable collapse came and values tumbled fully as rapidly as they had advanced , finding many ( who but a short period before had based their worth on investments figured at several times their value ) loaded with overwhelming debts and mortgages quite impossible of liquidation .
in his hands wood engraving underwent a special transformation ; it became a means for rendering textures and tonal values .
with his lyrics , torben portrayed the revolt of the individual against the imposed principles and general degradation of true values and virtues .
i have seen men driven from the profession of priests of god , making the church a stench in the nostrils of men who knew values just as well as those trained in the universities do , all through alcohol , alcohol , alcohol .
however , the regression may not converge to unique values of the parameters , due to the non-linear nature of the expression for reflectance .
grant has shown the values of some of these as given by observation in the tables of meyer and more modern tables , and has compared them with the values assigned by newton from his theory ; and the comparison is very remarkable .
since kfem obtained the special consultative status accreditation of the united nations economic and social council ( ecosoc ) in may 1998 , the organization has helped to promote the un agenda within korean society and has played a major role in promoting the un 's values .
this is until the new core samples , and abrupt temperature and c02 increases in 2003-2007 have jumped all the values beyond cyclical historic values .
the parameters for the lennard-jones and coulomb potentials reflect effective values that account in a mean-field manner for higher-order and many-body dispersion and induction effects .
thus the three classes stand in the relation of fifty , twelve and six ; or taking the ceorl as unity , their respective values are 8⅓ , 2 and 1 : that is , ceorl : eorl : :1:2 .
the new religious metaphysic will then mean a real philosophy of values .
“ consecration to the task of adjusting ourselves to natural environment so that we secure the best values from nature without destroying it is not useless idealism ; it is good hygiene for civilization .
different values can be obtained by editing the url resulting from clicking these links , but the maximum possible value is 5,000 .
for arbitrary values of n , can be solved efficiently using e .
we acknowledge that traditional public fora have characteristics that promote first amendment values in ways that the provision of internet access in public libraries does not .
[ sidenote : representative notions have also inherent values . ]
figure 2 presents a graphic summary of values of breeding indices for many groups of kansan birds .
he is the whole world to me , just as he is ; he comprehends all the values there are -- then how can you add one ? ” “ she 's pretty far gone. ” he said that to himself .
assign values as above , but rank by number of appearances first , then score .
i have traveled the world over in search of the quaint and curious , and i have a collection of nearly five hundred rings of all patterns , makes and values .
in the following list are given the `` trade values agreed upon by the experiment stations of massachusetts , rhode island , connecticut , new jersey and vermont , after a careful study of prices ruling in the larger markets of the southern new england and middle states . ''
since then , canada and luxembourg have developed a partnership which encompasses shared values and an ongoing political dialogue on major international issues .
both are balanced into equal values with a breadth quite admirable , the utmost darks being very heavy and strong without losing their transparency ; the highest lights dazzling in brightness , yet broken and full of sparkle .
`` perseverance will do much , '' replied mr. spottiswoode , `` if a lady values attention .
it is a classic statement of republicanism , warning americans of the political dangers they can and must avoid if they are to remain true to their values .
the school is based on catholic values .
to that end , ppc publishes resources that advance religious scholarship , stimulate conversation about moral values , and inspire faithful living .
object : to seek for spiritual values in religion , philosophy , science , literature and art .
of him , the present possessor purchased it for fifteen hundred florins , ( about 140_l._ ) and now values it at twice the sum .
the mission of the let action researcher is to overcome workplace norms and self- behavior which contradict the researcher 's values and beliefs .
the scoring and point values were just like the tv show .
he did chiefly teach that the power not ourselves is fatherly , that it is human , that we can trust our own souls at their best to teach us the nature of god , that our highest human values are the ultimate realities of the universe .
his later works involved a sustained attack on christianity and christian morality , and he seemed to be working toward what he called the transvaluation of all values ( umwertung aller werte ) .
the professor , whose hobby is real estate values , fell into a discussion with the suave landlord on the subject , considered locally .
she and janey strongly believe in the values of new york society .
the design of a universal indicator requires a mixture of indicators whose adjacent pka values differ by about two , so that their transition ph ranges just overlap .
for many algorithms , performance is dependent not only on the size of the inputs , but also on their values .
airbus and boeing 2010 values have been estimated by flightglobal using average list prices to enable like-for-like comparisons .
a left outer join can usually be substituted for an inner join when the join field in one table may contain null values .
following is a list of midi values .
every before or after the anniversary of sigma epsilon phi sephians conduct an outreach activity to promote charity , to exemplify the good fundamental values the sephians have and to share the blessing to the people in need .
gold and silver is the measure of values .
the moment we attach other than purely æsthetic values to paintings—either ancient or modern—we are confronted by so extensive and differentiated a set of tests that chaos or error is unavoidable .
taking the dielectric constant of air as unity he obtained the following values , for shellac k = 2.0 , glass k = 1.76 , and sulphur k = 2.24 .
these weeks i have employed in `` transvaluing values . ''
this tapering-fingered hand denotes a keen sense of artistic values ; a love of the esthetic , refined and beautiful ; and real artistic _appreciation_ , but _not_ the ability to create .
he has not brought to the surface merely its dregs , but its most significant values .
the issuer does have to take care to prevent collisions between existing values so as not to wrongly issue two identical serial numbers .
we have , however , been careful to preserve the relative values of the different tones .
mutual understanding is impossible between two people whose sense of values is fundamentally opposed , and music , the one thing that had counted all through nan 's life , was a matter of supreme unimportance to the older woman .
puddings , table of food values of , 179 .
if we take as rough values a = 21 × 10^6 feet , g = 32 foot-second units , we get a velocity of 36,500 feet , or about seven miles , per second .
gdp done - they were a mix of nominal and ppp values .
spiritual values -- claire : spiritual values !
the 1992 constitution of the czech republic declares sovereignty ( self-government ) of the people and the values of freedom and democracy .
the various values placed upon different meats , breads , etc. , in the general esteem would seem to depend in great measure on associated ideas and emotions , rather than on their actual qualities for taste .
the perineal patterns , male stylet length values ( smaller for m .
as already stated , the american occupation brought about a rapid rise in the price of everything , not of necessity or in obedience to the law of supply and demand , but because it was the pleasure of the americans voluntarily to enhance established values .
with the exception of hydrogen , and probably also helium , all the gases show greater values for the coefficient of expansion than for the coefficient of pressure , and the differences are greater the greater the coefficient of expansion of the gas .
a popular choice for θ is to provide maximum a posteriori ( map ) estimates of it by maximizing the marginal likelihood of the process ; the marginalization being done over the observed process values y .
this estimate can be made , for example , by comparing the speed of the fall of a mist in fields of different values , or , as did j.j. thomson , by measuring the total quantity of electricity liberated throughout the gas .
gardella often mourned for the " golden age of hollywood " and criticized declining values .
the major aspect is that the dynamics of the system was severely affected by artificially maintaining a pragmatic framework and a system of values not suited to change .
hopfield nets normally have units that take on values of 1 or -1 , and this convention will be used throughout the article .
this purported use for determining values of _ore_ is of about pliny 's average accuracy .
since the actual values of the two intervals here are throughout of extreme sign -- one always greater , the other always less -- only errors which lie in a single direction are discriminable .
when some values are too low , and some are too high , the opportunities for speculative gain are evident .
these various kinds of evidence must be compared , their respective values must be considered , and thus alone , in our time , can the nearest approximation to the truth be reached .
real estate values doubled , farms were platted into village lots , wild lands were turned into farms , and a new impulse was given to legitimate and illegitimate enterprises .
let the odd numbers according to their values stand for `` a '' : a=1 aa=3 aaa=5 aaaa=7 aaaaa=9 and the even numbers according to their values stand for `` b '' : b=2 bb=4 bbb=6 bbbb=8 bbbbb=0 and then ?
of course , to be meaningful the coefficients are restricted to values such that the equations are independent and consistent .
the trade-off between floating point and integers is that the space between large floating point values is greater than the space between large integer values of the same bit depth .
the gradual decontrol process based on rateable values was stopped , and a system of phased rent increases was introduced for all tenancies .
while the book is made up of narratives from individuals of widely varying backgrounds , the stories share common themes , and together , they reveal many intriguing aspects of the japanese psyche and the values of japanese society as a whole .
our perception of spiritual interests and spiritual values grows and deepens , and our communion with our dead becomes an indication of the extent of our own spiritual growth .
its values are strictly æsthetic ; attempts to paint on a purely scientific basis have proved both monotonous and ludicrous .
table to translate raw ascii values ( a , d,m , s ) to new subroutine index ( 1,4,3,2 ) in constant time using one-dimensional array ( gaps in the range are shown as ' .
she loves her husband too much to wish to hurt his feelings by explaining the situation , and she values domestic peace too much to risk friction by making unexpected claims .
the juggler of the old pack is named pagat , and although the lowest in number it has peculiar values that recall the fact that when used for fortune-telling it represented the inquirer into the wishes of the gods .
it is a highly specialised sub-field which examines issues related to service personnel as a distinct group with coerced collective action based on shared interests linked to survival in vocation and combat , with purposes and values that are more defined and narrow than within civil society .
`` araminta , let me beg you not to deceive yourself about the changing moral values we hear so much of nowadays .
if they have not a sense of relative values it is because they do n't get me to run their campaign for them .
in economic policy for a free society simons writes that all it takes to precipitate a massive liquidation of securities is " a relatively small decline of security values " .
`` well—he will never see any of his money or values back again ! ''
this chart may also be used for efficiency based upon combustible when the evaporation from and at 212 degrees and the heat values are both given in terms of combustible .
the indirect are also traced to existing taxation , and their witnesses are crippled trade , unsettled values , oppressive prices , and an inconvertible currency , which of itself is a constant sacrifice .
if everton should show the bit of ore to blackwell the superintendent might believe the charge that we were stealing the lawrenceburg values for the `` salting '' purpose ; in which case he would doubtless swear out warrants for us .
this health screening has been used to provide baselines of the normal physiologic values of the species , identifying potential future problems due to parasites , diseases , etc .
now more than ever the core values of the labour movement are needed to construct a fairer , stronger , more sustainable ireland from the ashes of austerity .
he really believes in nature , and values life for the power of what johnson calls reciprocation of benevolence .
the article even mentions " he measurement scale used by the ahdi is different from that used in the un 's human development index , and these values can not be compared to those " .
i 'm just trying to speak to what i perceive are the relevant community values .
the case for this legislation rests mainly on the fact that , for the first time in the world 's history , land values everywhere show an unmistakable tendency to advance indefinitely .
parameters passed to procedures , as well as return values , are considered to be variables .
_effects on values._ -- in the same way the values of goods measured in labor will in general be declining values .
kasturi is a family drama , where relations and values conflict each other .
they facilitate the understanding of both work and general values that individuals uphold .
die voortrekkers is a youth movement for afrikaners in south africa and namibia with a membership of over 10 000 active members to promote cultural values , maintaining norms and standards as christians , and being accountable members of public society .
while e may be any value ( positive , negative , or zero ) generally positive or negative values smaller in magnitude than one equivalent of substrate are used in reaction progress kinetic analysis .
there will be a strange readjustment of values on the other side .
faith , truth , and integrity " - symbolizes the three core values of the school that must be observed in and outside of the institution .
the tax on land values , which is the least arbitrary of taxes , possesses in the highest degree the element of certainty .
the coincidence of all the vital values had come in one day , almost in one hour .
precise radio tracking of the pioneers as they coasted past jupiter and its satellites revealed that jupiter is about one percent heavier than had been anticipated , and several satellites were found to have masses that differ by more than ten percent from values determined previously .
lwlc is a caring christian community that values pastoral care for staff , students , families and friends , it is a vital part of who we are .
decreasing property values generally and the introduction of legislation in spain to tackle the issue has diminished the financial incentive to illegally clear forested land for development by burning .
the third clade provisionally contains a number of genera , seleucidis , the drepanornis sicklebills , semioptera , ptiloris and lophorina , but support values for some of these is inclusions is low .
the comparison cmp ( compare ) and test instructions set the flags as if they had performed a subtraction or a bitwise and operation , respectively , without altering the values of the operands .
the nature conservancy includes lily point as " priority conservation area " because of the site 's exceptional and regionally important ecological values .
a common enough experience in america , the land of sudden changes of fortune , of rosiest hopes about '' striking it rich , '' of carelessness and ignorance as to values , of eager and untrained appetite for luxury and novelty of any and every kind .
a primary goal of guevara 's thus became to reform " individual consciousness " and values to produce better workers and citizens .
in the next column of the table are given the refractive indices of the glasses , while the third column contains the values of ν .
momentum and energy for the two-particle decay are constrained to these values , but this is not the way nature behaves .
since the middle ages , many values have been specified in several countries .
for those who are willing to take the additional care necessary to handle them successfully , rapid isochromatic or orthochromatic plates are undoubtedly to be preferred , as they preserve quite clearly the color values .
the assumptions for this analysis include that both systems are operating at steady state under the conditions observed in experimental procedures ( see table below for values used ) .
when the human factor in problem solving is kept in mind through a list of values and a code of conduct , personal problem solving becomes a matter of analyzing internal conflict ( fear , arrogance , laziness , or loneliness ) .
the brain doesn 't work in the same way as a computer , and doesn 't work with simple on and off values .
some problems specify that one or more of the variables are constrained to take on integer values .
the decision of ward cj balanced the freedoms of religion , expression and association against the values of tuvaluan stability and culture , with the chief justice accepting the evidence of the unrest and tension on nanumaga .
you have lost your sense of proportion , your appreciation of values .
some commentators on news values have argued that journalists ' training in news values itself represents a systemic bias of the news .
yet i am concerned to make acknowledgments , because a man always values highly the kindness he does not expect .
knowledge in use is wisdom , and wisdom implies a sense of values -- you know a big thing from a little one , a valuable fact from a trivial one .
he values himself upon his own delicacy , in expressing his indignation against her friends , for supposing what he pretends his heart rises against them for presuming to suppose . ]
adding 32 is necessary so that all values fall into a compression group .
it would seem to be expedient to recognize this controlling fact -- one that no nation alone can change -- by a careful readjustment of the legal ratio for coinage of one to sixteen , so as to conform to the relative market values of the two metals .
the materials used to manufacture the dredge pipe pieces are both manganese alloy that provides high elongation and impact value or high chromium , nickel and molybdenum alloy that gives high yield , high tensile and very high hardness values .
and they want rules of conduct , a guide for practical affairs , a scale of values for this world .
[ footnote 4 : shaw allum , the present mogul , reads , values , but can not imitate , the institutions of his great ancestor .
whilst enrollment is open to pupils of all religious denominations and none , the school 's religious ethos emphasises practice of roman catholic moral values both in the church and in the community , with its own chaplain and many associated charitable and community-based activities undertaken .
the foregrounded teachings , rather than being meditation and wisdom , are " humaneness " and " forbearance " , these being the most applicable religious values for the governance of a buddhist state .
the mean of the values of ne in the preceding table is 1.24 × 10^10 .
opposed to this machine of treachery and cruelty , i had seen an uprising of the people of three nations , men hating war and therefore enlisted in this righteous war to preserve values more precious than the individual life .
the essay was by alexander s. porter , on `` real estate values in boston during the present century . ''
it is the implementation and exhibition of these values combined with the text inscribed on the memorial that transforms it from a simple honoring of a man into the honoring of all that he has been perceived to stand for .
i set the main table 's width too 1000 , but i would like to discard absolute values and start using percentages .
the interior groups have the lowest values and the eastern groups show relatively broad faces .
the full , forceful application of western ideas and values in a world to which they are completely irrelevant produced strange results during the nineteenth century .
ruthless , rapacious , greedy of power , greedy of gain , it is in slavery that he wantons in all the luxury of injustice , for it is here that he tastes the exquisite pleasure of depriving others of that which he most values in himself .
the relations between values of different natures vary according to the state of society .
or conditions ) and potentially calling multiple subroutines ( instead of just a single set of values and ' branch to ' program labels ) .
larp with very high production values .
the filter correction gain matrix l has one column containing the alpha and beta gain values .
the country was flooded with paper , which was secured on the impossibility of values continuing .
the peninsula has been designated an antarctic specially protected area ( aspa 126 ) for , as well as its birdlife , several additional scientific and historical values .
no man who values the interests of society , or knows the value of peace and good order in a community , can be supposed for a moment to justify the intemperate and incautious conduct of those deluded men .
when computing transforms , values of this " function " outside this grid have to be interpolated and the integrals approximated by finite sums , a process inevitably introducing further errors .
as many parameters are quite variable in space , expert judgment is needed to arrive at representative values .
the higher levels the real and the ideal -- the bread of life -- life's unvarying values .
contains a raw color palette and consists of 256 24-bit rgb colour values .
the few who believe that literacy comprises not only skills , but also ideals and values , say that the destiny of our civilization is at stake , and that the decline in literacy has dreadful implications .
ct and copying values for the parameters over as needed and fill in the rest by hand .
rates were a property tax traditionally assessed on property values , but with major exemptions existed in scotland , so a minority actually paid them .
specific concerns have been raised by rural residents who claim that wind farms have an unacceptable impact on property values , health and the environment .
the degree of colocalization in fluorescence microscopy images can be validated using the colocalization benchmark source , a free collection of downloadable image sets with pre-defined values of colocalization .
where specific named values are required , these are introduced as quote types .
this is a list of known oxidation states of the chemical elements , excluding nonintegral values .
these mass membership organizations , putnam argues , allow members to be very loosely connected , perhaps only by shared values or ideals .
i 'd never be so perceptibly second-rate , but in the matter of furnishings as well as food values , i 'd find my perfect balance between quality and quantity , and keep it . ''
tung-dzih xonn-dzih ) uses chinese characters phonetically , as a syllabary of 2082 glyphs , and the other ( tung-dzih lo-maa-dzih ) is an alphabetic romanization system with similar sound values and tone spellings to gwoyeu romatzyh .
the cultural and natural values of kakadu national park were recognised internationally when the park was placed on the unesco world heritage list .
instead , the first step of calculation is the computation of the gradient values .
clarification of ideas and disentanglement of values are as essential to æsthetic activity as to intelligence .
family values , sometimes referred to as familial values , are traditional or cultural values ( that is , values passed on from generation to generation within families ) that pertain to the family 's structure , function , roles , beliefs , attitudes , and ideals .
land values west of the rockies dropped to practically nothing and the rich farms of the great plains were worth no more than they had been a hundred years before .
however , the singapore 's media development authority ( mda ) has announced that it will not allow ashley madison to operate in singapore as it promotes adultery and disregards family values .
not with money : with something cassim wants and values far more than money .
however they are often used with input values outside mcarthur 's intended design , resulting in ffdi values in excess of 100 .
a study of values .
the young man stood beside him in the store , and his practical knowledge of quality and values astonished the old farmer .
it has been said of other banned users that the reason they will stay banned is due to them being unable to work within the accepted norms and values of the community .
rental values return to society through expenditure on public infrastructures .
it is not so easy to make the differentiation when we view the thing from the standpoint of the consciousness of men who are at the centre of the situation , to whose consciousness the social values are presented .
this process was strengthened by the appearance of a new set of cultural values for the alps .
armstrong said that he will try to halt the united states from " drifting away from the values that made her great .
a perspective that addresses the phenomenon of person-as-person is grounded in central values such as caring , freedom , and creativity .
these programmes tend to avoid controversial issues and reflect beliefs and values sanctified by mass audience .
cafe and cafe standard values available at [ 1 ] .
this is true of legal and moral values .
coffee values , however , fell off less than the average values for all imports , the decrease for coffee being forty-three percent and for the country 's total imports fifty-two percent .
the letters ksi , psi , omega , ot , and izhitsa are kept , as are the letter-based denotation of numerical values , the use of stress accents , and the abbreviations or titla for nomina sacra .
however , in northern areas , pollen levels will be moderate with values of 4 .
it is important to keep in mind that the bic can be used to compare estimated models only when the numerical values of the dependent variable are identical for all estimates being compared .
he also argues that grounding moral values in claims about a blank slate opens them to the possibility of being overturned by future empirical discoveries .
the product of the x and y values of each point on the curve will equal the constant of proportionality ( k ) .
they should try their best to communicate their concerns relating to their beliefs , values and other cultural factors that might affect care and treatment to their physicians and other health care providers .
there is , thus , a definite and powerful interest opposed to the taxation of land values ; but to the other taxes upon which modern governments so largely rely there is no special opposition .
the ordinary 'reaction-time ' is midway between these values .
this is no place for extended argument as to the necessity of land nationalization , or the advantages or disadvantages of mr. george's scheme of a single tax on land values , with the consequent dropping of our whole complicated tariff .
these works have deep humor , satire , research-backed themes , great values , and so on , in sharp contrast to the mindlessness of archie comics .
: for values of : [ mit ] a common rhetorical maneuver at mit is to use any of the canonical { random numbers } as placeholders for variables .
still , it seemed quite plausible , alison 's views on advertising values considered .
participants must demonstrate respect for different ideas , thoughts and values , and must not interrupt each other .
[ 1336 ] under these perpetual changes it will be readily understood how difficult it is to estimate values at any special period .
ay , queen iseult , the ring is his -- above all other things he values it !
the values of these two fractions , for every half degree , will be found in the columns headed _a_ and _b_ of the table in the appendix .
these new values will increasingly be reflected in the person 's behavior .
they reflect reagan-era cold war values .
in periods of relative ideational saturation or stagnation , the mechanics of constitutional law or the give and take of legislative barter may distract from the basic framework of values and objectives giving shape to the political order .
and among these are the social , ethical and legal values of men and of social classes .
so x may be notable , and y , for specific values of y which you would expect , if not for space considerations to find in an article on x , is okay .
the theory of international values .
we cross-examine her , challenge her , and minutely weigh her evidence in human scales which can not measure her hidden values .
for instance , on a genuineintel processor values returned in ebx is 0x756e6547 , edx is 0x49656e69 and ecx is 0x6c65746e .
=a treatise on the comparative commercial values of gas coals and cannels.= by =d .
according to rabbi norman solomon , the concepts of havlaga and purity of arms arise out of the ethical and moral values stemming from the tradition of israel , extrapolation from the jewish halakha , and the desire for moral approval and hence political support from the world community .
prohibited activities , defined in sections 5 to 9 of the act , are ahr activities that parliament has determined to be ethically unacceptable or incompatible with canadian values , or to pose significant risks to the health , safety and values of canadians .
christian values and teaching were interwoven within the school curriculum .
secret nonce values are used by the lamport signature scheme as a signer-side secret which can be selectively revealed for comparison to public hashes for signature creation and verification .
more seldom we may in this manner obtain trustworthy values for a distance amounting to 10 siriometers ( π = 0″.02 ) , or even still greater values .
in addition , the approach only applies to conditional patterns that perform equality tests against constant values .
the unusual combination of a large well-equipped stage with the small capacity of 1,000 allows bclo to blend community theatre actors with broadway production values .
the master can then read all latched values and calculate the delay for each slave .
their entire inability to reach even an elementary conception of values ...
during this time he was very dedicated to the growth and development of the community , defending the values of the human person , especially the value of life .
knobbed , misshapen and massive , it was as difficult to believe that they were not real gold as it was to believe the accompanying statistics of their weights and values .
these values surpass several of the tipping point thresholds .
in addition to these , some of the lower fractional values are described by words meaning `` very small , '' `` very fine thread , '' `` sand grain , '' `` dust , '' and '' very vague . ''
fundación cultural sebastián and museo sebastianthe fundación cultural sebastián was founded in 1997 with sebastián as first president as a non-governmental cultural organization to promote mexican cultural values , especially the arts .
in the reality of life , we are interested only in the values of the function of the phenomena by themselves and to arrive at right conclusions we have to use units appropriate to the phenomena .
it was not only that they were ill-drawn , or that the colour was put on amateurishly by someone who had no eye for it ; but there was no attempt at getting the values , and the perspective was grotesque .
since the 1960s , resort development on the sea islands has greatly increased property values threatening to push gullahs off family lands they have owned since emancipation .
however , all this part of the work has already been done by competent scientists , and tables have been prepared by them , in which the values for each material are put down .
the mother whose interests are chiefly in clubs and other social organizations places these higher in her scale of values than her home .
tabulate and diagram the values of the imports and of the exports of the u. s. to and from europe , n. a. , s. a. , asia , oceanica and africa for the latest five years reported .
it is immeasurably small at ordinary temperatures for ion-reactions , and , on the other hand , fairly large for nearly all reactions in which carbon-bonds must be loosened ( so-called `` inertia of the carbon-bond '' ) and possesses very high values for most gas-reactions also .
he is clever , cautious in choosing words and values the seniority of age , a supreme value in tribal people .
already in central illinois the values of land seem to have reached the high water mark .
each hour of the day raises or lowers the colour values in nature ; and he who would copy nature ’ s form as a permanent interpretation must ignore the exactitude of its reflections and approximate only to its local colours .
`` now then , '' replied barbican , `` the expression having numerical values , i am trying to find _v_ , that is to say , the initial velocity which the projectile must possess in order to reach the point where the two attractions neutralize each other .
there are postage stamps of four values .
but in trade , do two _equal_ values cease to be equal , because one comes from the plough , and the other from the workshop ? ''
civilization and religion : an argument about values in human life .
american values are shifting , and that extreme social conservatism is being increasingly rejected .
similarly , if the lines are south , the values become northerly .
a small party established by taito phillip field aimed at advancing pacific peoples , as well as christian and family values and social justice .
the seasonally adjusted annual rate ( saar ) is a rate that is adjusted to take into account fluctuations of values in the data which might occur due to seasonality .
the values isolated , idealistic , instead of ruling and leading action , turn _against_ it and condemn it .
in the context of a relational database table , a column is a set of data values of a particular simple type , one for each row of the table .
in addition , this committee has reaffirmed the values expressed through that policy in a series of decisions and motions , and fundamental norms concerning biographical articles have been emphasized in a resolution of the wikimedia foundation board of trustees .
the social , and at present the commercial values are obvious to every one , and of these the commercial value is growing very loud in its assertions , and appears very exacting in its demands .
fruits are acceptable gifts , [ 459 ] because they are the flower of commodities , and admit of fantastic values being attached to them .
also , there are more values for the luminance .
the shift from traditional to secular-rational values has been described by engelbrekt and nygren as " essentially the replacement of religion and superstition with science and bureaucracy " .
he says there are no absolute values “ good ” and “ evil ” ; these are mere means adopted by all in order to acquire power to maintain their place in the world , or to become supreme .
the admission that the second problem only touches the highest values in the æsthetic scale may be thought to render the whole inquiry vain .
students are expected to follow the values of the acronym t .
we are committed to providing vistarians with a holistic education that will equip them with the necessary values , knowledge and skills to meet challenges of the future .
“ yes , ” added kennedy ; “ he doesn ’ t like categories. ” “ but each thing has its value whether he likes it or not. ” “ i do not deny different values , or even categories .
i would suggest that it would be much more friendly to editors to consolidate values as lists rather than adding a new key for each value .
he values words as sounds , and can combine them harmoniously in his little stanzas .
they are of different values , and some do not exceed a livre , and perhaps some are still less .
teachers also spend time and energy helping children develop values , social skills , and understanding of their roles as citizens of the larger community .
love , beauty and truth : fundamental nursing values .
canada and many countries of the caribbean have a special relationship based on a long history of close commercial , investment , cultural and political ties as well as many shared common values and resemblance of institutions .
economic values arise in connection with attitudes toward things .
phase noise can be measured and expressed as single sideband or double sideband values , but as noted earlier , the ieee has adopted the definition as one-half of the double sideband psd .
but even then , if the values of the letters change as they would do , they would get out of their normal proportions of frequency ; so that a variable letter cypher seems unlikely .
so with values , there is a mean or average which is constant , and by referring individual values to that we can determine their fluctuations .
it is placed above all human values .
in statically-typed languages , a nullable type is an option type ( in functional programming terms ) , while in dynamically-typed languages ( where values have types , but variables do not ) , equivalent behavior is provided by having a single null value .
as the lower court argued , the circumstances and values of the day no longer supported the view that christianity can guide what constitutes valid criminal law .
where strong prejudice values are present , as in the case of negroes , every conception of equality and nationalism incorporated in the statute-book is perverted .
the final number of grids is presumably the product of the values in each cell .
in this imaginary model , there is a direct correspondence between prices and the values of commodities .
an expert in such work has said that `` city planning has few functions more important than the restoration of impaired property values . ''
therefore , comparisons of n50 values derived from assemblies of significantly different lengths are usually not informative , even if for the same genome .
a man might as well try to breathe without oxygen on mount everest as attempt to give his own life the proper dramatic values .
we remain steadfast in our commitment to defeating those who threaten our freedom and values .
if you take the points to be on the real line , then accumulation points and arbitrary values do not mix .
in the march 2002 election , seven of nine popularly elected representatives were chosen under the pro-democratic banner with the remaining two representing " traditionalist " values .
typical values of supply voltage on such networks are 7 to 30 v .
molinists naturally accept this , but deny that this entails that counterfactuals of creaturely freedom lack truth values .
modern orthodox judaism ( also modern orthodox or modern orthodoxy ) is a movement within orthodox judaism that attempts to synthesize jewish values and the observance of jewish law , with the secular , modern world .
in davidman 's account , friedman 's position on femininity differed entirely from the values of his students , with friedman of the opinion that men and women are fundamentally different .
the osmonds are devout members of the church of jesus christ of latter-day saints , and their religious values have influenced their careers .
and long after these initial forms have disowned their sensuous values , and suffered a wholly dialectical expansion or analysis , mathematical objects again fall under the æsthetic eye , and surprise the senses by their emotional power .
fifthly : the values of commodities are often said to be determined by the costs of production .
provenance , characteristics , and values of modern bookbinding leathers .
go into a large establishment with a good reputation and you will find out that they give to the people who come to buy merchandise from them good values .
it may be possible to avoid this if the language ( such as eiffel ) makes constant values of a class , functions without arguments , and data members interchangeable .
it is committed to provide quality education to the youth to conserve culture and traditions , to evangelize on the gospel truths and values to be able to produce productive citizens that will become leaders for church and society .
when a letter is returned from the dead-letter office the sender is required to pay the regular postage and these envelopes have been prepared of various values .
besides being an authority on real estate values , mr. veale is well known in eastern ontario as a breeder of white wyandotte chickens , as a consistent exhibitor and prize-winner .
the designs of all values and for all the colonies are the same , with the exception that the stamps bear the name of the colony in the label under the portrait .
two tests recently made by mr. e. c. woodward , assayer , colorado springs , colo. , show values as follows : gold oz .
along with the growth in population and industry was a growth in property values .
fractional values are indicated by a separator , which varies by locale .
he could not help seeing that chicago was a growing city , and that land values must rise .
he may be a social failure on account of his instability , or a social success if he converts his experiences into social values , —puts them into the form of a poem , makes of them a contribution to science .
he initiated and helped organized public events and cultural activity that promoted the state of israel and its jewish and universal values .
the loq is the limit at which we can reasonably tell the difference between two different values .
this data is collected in the form of measured analog current or voltage values or the open or closed status of contact points .
armed with an almost complete mastery of rembrandt , i discovered that delacroix obtained his effects by means of his colour , and rembrandt by means of his values ; but they are worthy of each other .
segmentation of power and religious leadership were the two values evoked by nomenclature generated in the war .
the family is our own mirror reversed once and again , a parody of society ; each image takes to the absurd certain values and ideals , that are sold to us and dominate our existence .
furthermore , if the design is enhanced by adding more components then all the element values must be calculated again from scratch .
addressing this christian publication , harris provided a statement that explains her deep grounding in judeo-christian values .
far from being objectionable then , attacks of depression , if not allowed to proceed too far , and if kept from paralyzing activity , prove to be intervals when life values are seriously weighed and when a proper estimation of such values is come to .
this conservatism reflected the artistic and social values of its first director , walser greathouse ( d .
guaranteed minimum surrender values .
the removal of the values of hay and dunning , reduces to a determination the values of d for states c and d , and makes the three other values relating to state b homogenous .
the variable line ( d ) is the commercial ratio of the values of the two metals during that period .
the moral values may get reversed in the boy 's mind .
the government values the brands at a far more reasonable $ 400 million .
mr. dorr and associates , of course , had previously taken advantage of the big “ slump ” or fall in values to buy back at 35 the same stock they had sold to the public some weeks before at 70 .
they are marked by lack of optimism for the future , nihilism , cynicism , skepticism , political apathy , alienation and distrust in traditional values and institutions which describe the similarities between gen x and the burnt generation .
he is a rational man whose life is organized precisely and who greatly values his importance and reputation in society .
natively shrewd himself , and even sensuous beneath his mask , soames had not spent thirty-eight years over his one hobby without knowing something more about pictures than their market values .
the izs endeavors to imbue these young people with the spirit of the values of zionism .
if he uses ten hours of the same costly kind of labor in making an addition to his hut , he proves that he values that gain ten times as highly as he does either of the others .
silly scents color pencilcolor values are approximate .
the labour party claim that this is a trick to hide his conservative values from others .
( check if the values s7=60 and s11=55 are not too high . )
number of values allowed for each digit .
the change has been made in order that the algebraic signs of the values obtained from the application of the formula should be the same as those observed in the experimental arrangements , as demanded by the convention .
these ( 1 and 2 ) constitute respectively the material _in_ which , and the forms _through_ which , the world of `` values '' is to be realised .
to create awareness about environment by bringing them closer to nature and to learn the values of physical work .
other foods of the world , consumed in smaller quantities , may have nutrient densities higher than these values .
“ value is the ratio between two exchanged services. ” [ 708 ] and , seeing that individual property and private fortunes represent sums of values , we might say that a person ’ s property is merely the sum of the services rendered by him .
in addition , he affixes , according to his philosophical formula , a scale of values to such mental attributes as objectivity , power to will , scepticism , positivity and constraint .
one of the most interesting applications of the calculus of probabilities concerns the mean values which must be chosen among the results of observations .
the only grayscale values are 0 ( black ) , 56 ( dark gray ) , 7 ( light gray ) , and 63 ( white ) .
another of its objectives is to initiate greater understanding and co-operation between the world 's cultures , religions and ways of life , while inspiring a positive change in the values of malaysians throughout the world .
globalization has exposed us to new challenges and changed the way old challenges touch our interests and values , while also greatly enhancing our capacity to respond .
evaporation , precipitation , river inflow and sea ice melting influence surface salinity values .
the simplest version of the minhash scheme uses different hash functions , where is a fixed integer parameter , and represents each set by the values of for these functions .
all other values , such as windage , time-to-target , impact velocity , and energy will be calculated based on the actual range of 500 meters .
the values range from 0 to 1 .
`` they are of all sizes and values .
his scale of political values was different from that of most of his followers .
we begin by verifying the values of work and heat flow depicted in the figure .
17. -- the thompson indicator , an instrument for determining compressions and explosion pressure values and recording them on chart . ]
same as list of songs performed on the x factor ( uk tv series ) or list of songs in south park , which are also musical lists related and belonging to highly different categories and apparently has no informational values apart from gathering them in one page .
explain their story values : 1 .
the notation is similar for the b values .
depreciation is reflected , not only in market values , but also in appraised or assessed valuations .
for any integer n not divisible by eight , this constructs a polynomial which , upon specializing the values , gives all of the cyclic extensions of any given base field with characteristic prime to n .
in a single patch surface ( bézier surface ) , there is one more pole than the degree values of the surface .
i would have considered the definition as giving all the different polynomial values with real coefficients rather than all the possible forms of expression .
as we execute the program , line by line , the values of i and x change , reflecting each statement of the source code in execution .
_utility as related to value._—while utility is a basis of all values , it is not the chief element in measuring the value of wealth .
the ideals which animate him , and determine -- so far as these are visible -- his own sense of values , are concepts and attitudes extraneous to the chinese scene .
it has been called `` a regulation and control of immediate promptings of impulses in conformity with some prescribed conduct '' ; as `` the organization of activity with reference to a system of fundamental values . ''
the rna integrity number ( rin ) is an algorithm for assigning integrity values to rna measurements .
then , if the program dumps core on the first mouse click , one might add : `` well , for suitably small values of ` works ' . ''
but in general , the causes governing the values of goods , and the causes governing the value of money , are sufficiently independent to justify us in studying each separately , in abstraction , on the assumption that the other is unchanged .
the values given for half-life and decay constant are the current consensus values in the isotope geology community .
she envisaged a new generation of children fortified with sound values , well equipped to meet the challenges of the new era .
at its meeting in 2009 in vienna , the commission decided to express the standard atomic weight of hydrogen , carbon , oxygen , and other elements in a manner that clearly indicates that the values are not constants of nature .
reference will be made here only to the vein deposits in which gold , with silver , constitutes the principal values .
she had not yet found the man who would make her fortune ; but she had no doubt that he would appear if she continued on her even road , selecting without passion , judging values and possibilities .
in the historical panorama which moves behind _inglesant_ , there are at least 'tactile ' values , and seventeenth-century england is conjured up in a wonderful way ; how accurately i do not know .
that they held these capacities temporarily merely , and as novices and amateurs , while men held theirs as experts , for long service or for superior values by right of masculine abilities , had no weight whatsoever .
this hue should make slightly stronger value and chroma contrast than the remaining hues._ values for small objects rule 12m .
maxwell made a comparison between the optical refractive index and the dielectric constant of paraffin wax , and the approximation between the numerical values of the square of the first and that of the last was sufficient to show that there was a basis for further work .
the initial-series values : 9.12.14.10.11 ; 9.12.14.10.16 ; and 9.13.14.13.1 , belonging to the three dates of the secondary series , respectively , do not appear in the text at all ( a fact indicated by the brackets ) , but are found only by calculation .
in 1903 , a new pictorial definitive set of six values was issued .
the values can be strings , numbers , tables , functions , etc .
2091 the practical values of space exploration report of the committee on science and astronautics u.s. house of representatives eighty-sixth congress second session pursuant to h. res .
in numerical analysis , numerical differentiation describes algorithms for estimating the derivative of a mathematical function or function subroutine using values of the function and perhaps other knowledge about the function .
the comparisons are unflattering , any plea in favor of these simple values seems compromised from the get-go .
if the value of wheat falls , the value of best wheat lands sometimes follows ; but land values do not directly affect prices of products , though they may be directly dependent upon those prices .
democratic values permeate the society and the citizens feel that they can influence the development , and that they have the will of taking that responsibility for doing so .
a young monk disagrees , doubting dracula 's values .
milk-mixtures , and the caloric values resulting ┌────────────────┬─────┬─────┬─────┬─────┬─────┬─────┬─────┬─────┐ │ percentages │lower│lower│lower│whole│upper│upper│upper│upper│ │ desired of │8 oz.│ 16 │ 28 │milk │ 24 │ 20 │ 16 │ 10 │ │ │ │ oz .
in dealing with historical writings he recognises the importance of the study of governments , institutions , and social life , and at the same time values highly a personal , vivid , direct manner , and a feeling for all that is real , concrete , and living .
less prosperous negroes also came , despite the feeling of some home owners that too great an influx of that type would injure property values and render the neighborhood less desirable .
at this point , all previous stores have committed their values to the memory system .
companies also time their real estate acquisitions when property values are generally on the decline .
for question 3 , 0 multiplied by itself is technically undefined , but by convention we say that anything multiplied by 0 is 0 ( or at least for finite values ) and so we say that 0 .
the duel takes place with a great deal of ceremony , each student being attended by a number of his own club , and each corps values as its highest honor the reputation of having the best fighters in the university .
modernism defied all the existing aesthetic and artistic values dominating painting , literature , poetry and other arts until that time .
those crucial values that motivate and underlie a nation or a group must be understood if the appropriate level of shock and awe is to be achieved .
to practice them successfully in all sorts of wild regions we must know the different species of trees one from another , and their relative fuel values , which as we shall see , vary a great deal .
protons and neutrons are fermions , with different values of the strong isospin quantum number , so two protons and two neutrons can share the same space wave function since they are not identical quantum entities .
most nisei were educated in canadian or american school systems where they were taught western values of individualism and citizenship .
they take no risk , can wait as long as they please for the expected rise , and pocket the entire amount of the increase in land values , to which they have made no important contribution .
in general , all digital files produced using any current professional software have some level of trapping provided already , via application default values .
the values of a given pixel in the output image are calculated by multiplying each kernel value by the corresponding input image pixel values .
on early imported coins and their values .
he values truth because , in whatever direction it takes him , it takes him either to god or towards him -- god , to whom he is in some sort akin , and after whose likeness he is in some sort made .
the best that can be done by way of generalizing determinants is have a set of values rather than a single value .
we will continue assuring muslims that american values are not at odds with islam .
a set of six values ( 2 , 5 , 10 , 20 , 25 and 50 drachmae ) with designs by o .
this is particularly true of the transition elements , where quoted electronegativity values are usually , of necessity , averages over several different oxidation states and where trends in electronegativity are harder to see as a result .
socialization functions as a control system in that newcomers learn to internalize and obey organizational values and practices .
little things , little momentary thoughts , momentary promptings of the sense , perhaps only a desire for rest , became charged , in his new reckoning of values , with terrible significances .
if , as is usually the case , the successive values of one of the quantities proceed by a constant increment , this quantity is to be regarded as the independent variable .
he had learned a little about values during these school and college days .
often values and expressions that are marked less popular among social conservatives , such as gay pride , the anti-war movement , or secular values generally , are invoked by users to frame their argument .
these methods have been developed , and new values found , by cornu , michaelson , newcomb , and the present writer .
in tokyo liu shipei propounded the overthrow of the manchus and a return to chinese classical values .
thus , while values above one are common for newborns , the ratio dwindles until it is well below one for the older population .
repeat steps 2 and 3 for other values of the natural frequency .
it is the duty of the church , as she values her existence , with gentle but firm hands to pull down and to keep down all such partitions .
material prosperity waits upon road development and land values rise in proportion to road improvement .
he now sees with a changed and vastly enlarged vision -- having been invested with an additional , a sixth sense , a sense which comprehends the things of god -- which penetrates into futurity and estimates eternal values .
according to united future , the party does indeed have a grounding in traditional values , but remains open to anyone who shares those values , not merely to christians .
i shall argue that in sembene 's work the " covertness " of the folk material takes the form of suppression of detail combined with the retention of essential values .
the bank for each round is divided into nine increasing values , hidden behind the numbers 1 through 9 .
its character -- we will not say its superiority -- lies in the extraordinary clearness with which the most obscure mental phenomena are analysed in relation to the ordinary values of daily life .
i have made a careful comparison of the values of a dollar and a ruble , using the weight of _pure_ silver in each as a basis , and i find that a ruble is 74.88+ cents ; call it seventy-five cents .
behind the american public mind lie practically the same economic system based on private property , the same kind of political democracy , the same character of scholastic training , the same conceptions of nationalism , roughly the same social and moral values .
lagrange shewed that if these values were once nearly equal , a libration sets in round a state of perfect equality ; but he offered no conjecture as to the cause of the primitive equality .
often enough the mistress wishes to be kind , but she fails to understand that what she values most differs from what is most valued by her servants .
and , if the latter , does the object , god as defined , or the notion , or the belief ( the acceptance of the notion ) effect these consequent values ?
this increases the importance of caching values from intermediate levels of the host and guest page tables .
his mental process is a reckoning that loses sight of its original values , and is over without reaching any concrete image .
the corresponding sql server data type is binary , with only two states , permissible values , zero and 1 .
i can also understand mr. gladstone , because he values the writing as the professor values the facts .
all the stamps of this issue are perforated 14 by the guillotine-machine , and the halfpenny is one of the values that still remain in issue in the island .
two provisional values for the next iterate are computed .
fractional values can be used , so if within 0 .
this optimization symbolically executes the program , simultaneously propagating constant values and eliminating portions of the control flow graph that this makes unreachable .
but if you 're talking about taking cultural ideas , like food , music , art , or even more broadly , scientific and cultural values , most wouldn 't find that offensive .
there is a sudden collapse of all values .
banasthali vidyapith is a center of learning for girls from nursery to post-graduate stage , offering them modern education together with india 's cultural and traditional values .
=the blur glass.= -- an ordinary magnifying-glass of about 15-inch focus , which you can get at an optician 's for fifteen or twenty cents , will blur the details , and help you to see the values , because it makes everything vague except the masses .
proponents argue that the cultural and political values of canadians and europeans have much in common , and that canadian membership would strengthen both sides politically and economically .
the distinction between prices in this sense and absolute values appears in adam smith and in ricardo .
it was generally true , and nowhere more so than in england , that protestantism was the result of a middle-class revolt against the existing régime , a denial of established standards in politics and morality , the determined attempt to effect a transvaluation of all customary values .
co. , into lands of the company at a great loss to me , as i took the lands at company 's schedule values instead of at the cost prices , while the stock cost me -- the full price of $ 100 per share .
oscar wilde himself -- the most sophisticated of hedonists -- declares in his `` soul of man '' that the inequality of the present system , when one considers aesthetic values alone , is as injurious to the rich as it is pernicious to the poor .
the problem is to determine whether the given formula is satisfiable , in other words if the variables can be assigned values such that they satisfy all the constraints .
he believes in being good to himself and generous to others ; values money only for what it will buy , and every day illustrates the fact that it is easier for him to earn ten dollars than to save one by being '' close . ''
rangoon11 has joined the discussion there and agrees that the current values should stay in place for consistency and accuracy .
an alternative notation is to use r ' , l ' , c ' and g ' to emphasize that the values are derivatives with respect to length .
mankind , according to nietzsche , is corrupt and its highest values are depraved .
for clarity , we refer to the input ( x ) as points and the output ( y ) as values ; compare critical point and critical value .
rcs measured in dbsm , large flat plates or non-stealthy aircraft have positive values .
each core also has a float-to-fix converter to convert floating-point values into integer form .
l. 24. values .
revaluation of property , plant and equipmentunder ifrs it is acceptable , but not required , to restate the values of property , plant and equipment to fair value .
those who have experience and expertise at creating defaultsort values do so .
nenshi said it would be reasonable to hire the " best guy " regardless of personal political values .
in the more complicated form of the game , this led to giving different values to these numbers , the nine being always supreme and the one on which the highest bets were wagered .
as they are sunk , the holes are cased with iron pipes , the drillings are carefully saved and washed , and the values are estimated for each foot of descent .
the fourteenth film of the godzilla series , it featured a slightly bigger budget with higher production values than the previous few films of the series .
an englishman has no ardour for honour , nor zeal for duty ; he neither values glory nor loves his king , but balances one danger with another , and will fight rather than be hanged .
the values of the images or symbols of the absolute unconscious are only disclosed if they are subjected to a synthetic ( not analytical ) treatment .
owing to values in canada varying widely from those prevailing in england , it was essential to tread very warily regarding the fixing of rates of pay and allowances and innumerable other points known only to those who have experience in an army pay office .
since 1994 , public policy in south africa has been anchored primarily in the values enshrined in the constitution .
in a great measure he relies , for his judgment of literary values , on his advisers and readers .
in the earlier apparatus 10-liter samples were used , and the volume of the respiration chamber was so large that it was necessary to multiply the values found in the residual sample by a very large factor , 500 .
and , that is something that everyone who values knowledge , truth and the right to be heard -- whether american or not -- should support .
pre- and post-ww2 rejection of western norms and cultural values .
r , g , b color values , each numeric and in range 0 .
caspary found the party 's code of secrecy to be contrary to her search for truth and questioning of values , which had led her to join in the first place .
when the cheap lands disappear , and rough food commands higher values , the beef cow will be raised as a luxury , and cattle will make their contribution to the human race largely in the form of milk , butter , and cheese .
if we markup a source page with wikicode to call a template using identified property values , then we can change the future formatting of this , and many pages , however we might wish , without needing to re-visit the many pages that used it .
current economic usage speaks of money as a '' measure '' of values .
the recruitment , training , principles , and values of the malay regiment are represented , including through documentaries commissioned by the national archives of singapore , world war ii paraphernalia , and witness testimony from survivors .
this hypothesis is supported by acute toxicity experiments , which demonstrate that despite a 50-fold range of ldse values for four gd ( iii ) complexes , all become lethally toxic when they release precisely the same quantity of gd ( iii ) .
we accept it much as the hero accepts his own struggle -- he believes in the values which he is fighting for and we sympathetically make his will ours .
the governor wished to have the assessment methodology changed to base values on the gross output of territorial mines .
the completed instrument can be calibrated by connecting it in series with another instrument whose calibration is known and marking the position of the pointer on the scale for different values of current .
and then a consideration of the effects of the continuous increase in land values which thus spring from material progress reveals in the speculative advance inevitably begotten when land is private property a derivative but most powerful cause of the increase of rent and the crowding down of wages .
the attempt was generally made to coin gold and silver at a ratio of weight corresponding exactly to their market values at a given moment and , every time the market conditions varied , the best full-weight coins of one of the two metals were taken out of circulation .
`` [ 1 ] variously manifested in partial achievements of order and goodness , in diversities of beauty , and in our graded apprehensions of truth , this spirit is yet most fully known to us in the transcendent values of holiness and love .
you do n't seem to have the same sense of values any more .
that the salt grass of bassing beach should have assumed such importance reveals again the sensitiveness to land values of men who had so recently left england .
in this respect the natural soil is wanting , as are also artistic values and the proper method of treating and cultivating oratory .
as the number of values per groups grows , the number of cross-product terms in this expression grows rapidly .
her pictures , said critics , lacked the masterly technique that only long experience and training could have given her , but they were frank , well-proportioned , and distinguished for their colour values .
a little later i remarked to the master , -- wishing to have a point cleared up , -- '' you say there are no fictitious values put upon works of art ; how do you mean ? ''
to the left is the offset to the start of the block , in the middle the data as hex values and to the right the same as ascii symbols just like any other hex editor but it has an enhanced interface .
chimneys , walls and roofs stole in upon the great shapes with foreign , grosser details that obscured their harmony , confused their proportion , as with two sets of values .
in cardinal games , the difference in individual payoffs for each player from individually changing one 's strategy ceteris paribus has to have the same value as the difference in values for the potential function .
but is it not after all the crystallized and conventionalized records of past time which have had to be used as the source material of such studies , and could the spiritual values of the family in any period be found in its laws and learned discourses ?
this increased the need for memory to values similar to normal ubuntu .
the art historian robert rosenblum said the apotheosis of homer represents " ingres ' most doctrinaire statement of his belief in a heirarchy of timeless values that are based on classical precedent .
as a nibble contains 4 bits , there are sixteen ( 24 ) possible values .
of our people , and , unfortunately , we are in the habit of inviting men to buy vacant land and hold it idle while waiting for a rise in values .
you cited the prisoner's lavish expenditure on motor-cars and pearl necklaces as evidence of his inability to recognise the value of money ; and this in turn clearly indicated a congenital incapacity to recognise values of any kind , whether physical or moral .
as simmel said , style is the manifestation of our inner feelings and through style we demonstrate out taste , values and status .
pounds sterling , pagodas , rupees , fanams , xeraphims , laris , juttals , matte , reis , rials , cruzadoes , sequins , pice , budgerooks , and dollars of different values were all brought into the official accounts .
in 1998 the mca method was widened by the discovery of a way to merge the three intrinsic values of a contact into a single indicator , via a series of algorithms .
the dancing in the show enhanced the environment and projected character without any reduction in the flashy entertainment values then prized in musical shows .
the communities realized that they could not only consider wildlife for its intrinsic , cultural and religious values but also derive economic benefits from the preservation of wildlife .
buganda kingdom federal state has values that karamoja federal state may not agree with , and vice versa , but neither can alter the result of the deliberations in either state ) .
it made the proposed resolution a recommendation to the legislature to declare gold and silver equally a legal tender , although there was a difference of five per cent , in their relative values .
currently , all possible values for δcp are with 1 .
the following are the approximate values of the closure temperatures of certain minerals listed by the isotopic system being used .
this supreme sense of content came first ; that , like a wash of warm colour , underlay the details that now began with a finer brushwork to outline themselves , and each of them appeared equally admirable , equally germane to the values of the emerging picture .
this makes it useful for understanding the statistical behavior of certain types of ratios of random quantities , in which variation in the denominator is amplified and may produce outlying values when the denominator of the ratio falls close to zero .
this nation , while welcoming all the gifts and values which people of other nations have brought to the enrichment and broadening of our common life , is still basically an english or anglo-saxon nation .
our friend uhlig , to whom i attribute excellent judgment , sends me word that he values this single overture more than the whole of mendelssohn .
speakers of endangered languages may themselves come to associate their language with negative values such as poverty , illiteracy and social stigma , causing them to wish to adopt the dominant language which is associated with social and economical progress and modernity .
it is none of my business to boom land values in argentina .
had these mines been on appropriated land , or had they been immediately monopolized so that rent could have arisen , it would have been land values that would have leaped upward , not wages .
he argues that in such cases these individuals infiltrate an institution or state , prevailing moral values are perverted into their opposite , and a coded language like orwell 's doublethink circulates into the mainstream , using paralogic and paramoralism in place of genuine logic and morality .
he values his relationships highly and is very considerate , often putting the needs of others before himself .
the other values are all found in potsdam , and allude generally to the maximum value of the apparent magnitude of the moon and the planets .
it remains to be seen then whether monopoly values are more prevalent in agricultural production than in industrial .
such a mystic as spinoza , who finds good in the understanding values this because in it man is '' active , '' and would unite himself with the all because in god is power and freedom .
the three values of this series , as well as other denominations in pence issued later , were withdrawn from use on july 1st , 1859 , when decimal currency was introduced .
cities and counties are not static ; the changes taking place in them involve the core of our values .
some researchers have noticed that the cosmology , values , and rituals of sukyo mahikari are similar to those of another new japanese religion , sekai kyūsei kyõ ( which in turn was strongly influenced by oomoto ) , shintoism , buddhism and japanese folk religion .
after the textbook controversy , a previously nonexistent group of private " christian schools " appeared throughout the state to teach values that some residents found more appropriate .
only think how strange , cousin ridd , i can not make him believe it. ” “ it is not strange at all , ” i answered ; “ considering how he values money .
the times correspondent michael savage noticed that galloway referred " heavily to his quasi-islamic values in his campaign literature .
of course , this operation may be generalized to other types of values , such as strings , aggregated data types and comparison sorts , utilize swaps to change the positions of data .
on the island rents will always remain high , on account of the great land values .
magellan honeycomb polymer m5 ( with planned values ) 1700 5 .
additionally , judith stacey proposed in the 1960s schools conveyed a hidden curriculum that perpetuated the " sexist beliefs , attitudes , and values " of the time period ( 1974 " and jill came tumbling after sexism in american education " ) .
the series of even numbers , 2 , 4 , 6 , 8 , 10 , 12 , 14 , 16 , ... _n_ , may be assumed to retain their present sequence values .
james returns to the values imbued with cricket , first into the 19th-century english bourgeois culture of the british public school , and then out into the colonies .
this is , that when phonetic values begin to attach themselves to the primitive ideographs , these are retained and attached to the signs expressing the primitive sound .
knowledge can be used to take control of someone or something , while lacking values and a neutral point of view .
let us now imagine that prices and values are in full accord , so that under our hypothesis only the cost of raw materials , the wear and tear of machinery , the use of tools and wages are comprehended .
so rare a sense of irony , so keen a perception of relative values , could hardly have been blunted even by twenty years' intercourse with the obvious .
these changes were even more striking when contrasted with the values and social practices that had prevailed in spanish society during the francoist regime , especially during the 1940s and the early 1950s .
lion rock spirit ( ) , is one of the core values ( 香港核心價值 ) that is inherited by hong kong people from generations to generations .
in one of his earliest papers dumas adopted the atomic theory as the corner-stone of his chemical system ; he was thus led to an experimental revision of the values generally accepted for the atomic weights of some of the elements .
as in the north korean standard , initial or never change their values .
this module allows wikitext to read values from data modules .
the common values for coc may not be applicable if reproduction or viewing conditions differ significantly from those assumed in determining those values .
it has a particular concern with the values of truth and opinion and how society organises ideas , though the book is over a thousand pages long and no one theme dominates .
but sometimes he also delivered correct values , which fact can be concluded from a comparison with some values given by polybius .
the only restriction is that the reserved values in the serial digital interface ( 0-3 and 1020-1023 ) may not be included in the udw .
well , some day we 'll put you where values are a little different .
on the other side the studies of the theoretical scholars can never yield the highest values for civilization if the problems which offer themselves in practical life are ignored .
a thermodynamic datafile is a set of equation parameters from which the numerical data values can be calculated .
we seem to move in a new atmosphere , and to be confronted with a view of life in which entirely different values hold .
the gun is also capable of killing innocent sims and destroying cars , boats , and planes , all of which have negative point values .
unless a philosophy is to remain symbolic -- or verbal -- or a sentimental indulgence for a few , or else mere arbitrary dogma , its auditing of past experience and its program of values must take effect in conduct .
but no statistical account of mean values is complete unless we also take account of the _amount of variability_ among the individual cases from which the mean value is drawn .
“ if acts of sabotage occur on the equipment and the values of the national bank or the emission bank , you and the gentlemen designated on the enclosed list will be held responsible personally and your property will be seized .
this article would also be useful to someone researching topics such as news values .
the sign is of rectangular form and has many values , consequently many meanings starting with the idea “ enclosure ” .
this can be calculated by trial-and-error , a spreadsheet of values , or hsp software .
therefore through machinery will come a restoration of the parcellaire laborer , a decrease of toil for the workman , a fall in the price of his product , a movement in the relation of values , progress towards new discoveries , advancement of the general welfare .
no-lapse guarantees can also be lost when loans or withdrawals are taken against the cash values .
if there is an additional magnitude of value or a loss of value after transformation compared with before then the relation between values ( proportional to bullshit ) and prices ( proportional to total capital advanced ) is incomplete .
what is the objection to the scale with tangent values ?
he was property poor , he said , and values had decreased so much of late years , that he was barely able to pay his taxes , although he really possessed nothing in the way of property except a tumble-down rookery on which there was a mortgage .
but relative values may change during the progress of a war , and the question of belgium -- which means the question of the sanction of international pledges -- now stands higher in the general view than the question of disarmament .
so the two compiler representing this values with two ways .
among the clubs desire to produce a nationally competitive team on the court , the club also heavily values its role in helping increase the popularity and participation of the sport .
at midsummer the extreme hourly values were 0.91 and 1.45 for a+ , 0.94 and 1.60 for a- .
then , that world of false imagination , senseless conflicts , and sham values , into which our children are now born , would be annihilated .
baroque and classical music eras , in which some notes with equal written time values are performed with unequal durations , usually as alternating long and short .
these sino-vietnamese words represent the number values used in ancient china , with each numeral increasing tenfold in digit value , 億 being the number for 105 , 兆 for 106 , et cetera .
actress preity zinta debuted in this film and enacted the lead role of a teenage single-mother who tries to overcome the wrong values of her society .
marcuse argued that whilst matters of technology design are often presented as neutral technical choices in fact they manifest political or moral values .
[ sidenote : imputed values : their inconstancy . ]
the name " immediate " comes from the values being available immediately from the instruction stream , as opposed to loading them indirectly by looking up a memory address .
species having only one brood per season tend to have shorter seasons than double-brooded species , and their index values tend to be lower than those of double-brooded species .
an approximate but conservative option value , termed the dm range option , can be estimated simply using range estimates of the present values of operating profit and launch costs .
those from the ashkenazi cluster had the highest values of 14 .
we must know that each of these values and virtues applies with equal force at the ends of the earth and in our relations with our neighbor next door .
the values are less marked .
the boundary condition for when each of these values is equal to unity may be represented by a circle drawn on the polar diagram representing the ( complex ) reflection coefficient , one for the input port and the other for the output port .
success is having established a set of values and living by them ; realizing time is precious and therefore should n't be wasted on petty grievances and concerns .
a bad act , an ugly woman , a cruel man , -- here we have negative values .
for example , the associated press has a page on their values and principles , which states that " we must explain in the story why the source requested anonymity " .
we should like our charge customers to have first choice of the interesting values before they are announced to the public .
while his traditional values provoked his criticisms of some aspects of mexico 's modernization , he always retained a special relationship with the people .
experimental values for the compressibility factor confirm this .
the actual heating values of different woods as determined by gottlieb show that per pound of dry wood there is little difference in heat value between different kinds of hard woods , and that pine gives per pound the highest value of all .
in some lines a fine sense of color values must underlie good work , in others the ability to draw easily .
`` their estimates are , without exception , far below the true values .
the little scheme , hatched in henderson 's new york office , in order to transfer certain already created values to the pockets of himself and his friends , appeared to have a national importance .
the idea of arranging the first practical machine for this number of variables , was that it might be used for the calculation of the corrections on values already found for the six elements of a comet or asteroid .
nigerian ladies association of texas ( nlat ) is an apolitical , non-profit formed by nigerian women that promote fellowship , community and family values .
it is important to note that throughout time , ads have changes from collectivist to a more individualist approach among korean ads due to shifts in cultural values .
the fishing industries of the great lakes or of the cold oceans , with a list of the fishes caught and their values .
bigger particles tend to sediment faster and thus have higher svedberg values .
for it is known to most men that the values of diamonds increase out of all proportion to their weight .
the pjsa has a number of partnership and affiliation agreements with organizations sharing its overarching mission and values .
the calculation of likelihood ratios for tests with continuous values or more than two outcomes is similar to the calculation for dichotomous outcomes ; a separate likelihood ratio is simply calculated for every level of test result and is called interval or stratum specific likelihood ratios .
the 8 decimal values whose digits are all 8s or 9s have four codings each .
for example , the values in a boolean circuit are boolean values , and the circuit includes conjunction , disjunction , and negation gates .
the washington postal authorities began issuing stamped envelopes , of the values of twelve and twenty-four cents , for those business men of los angeles and the pacific coast who were likely to use the recently-developed pony express .
this core is a kind of whole made up of isolated impressions mingling with a potency different in nature from themselves , and transmuting them to its own nature in the forms of self-consciousness , meanings , values .
you bid us turn to the cultivation , the nurture , of certain values in human life .
however , there was still left a considerable fund of old , idealistic values , and as long as we could draw upon them we saw in materialism only the power to clear up rooted prejudices , and to open the road for progress in every field .
increase in land values does not represent increase in the common wealth , for what land owners gain by higher prices , the tenants or purchasers who must pay them will lose .
as public interest station , according to decree 1446 of 1995 , its programming aimed primarily at raising the educational and cultural level of the inhabitants of the region of influence , promote and disseminate human values , civic education and public debate .
{ 176 } '' no less than five of our this dreadful change of value present coins must be called consists in sixpence farthing in , or else -- which would be going to the half-shilling worse -- new values must be instead of sixpence .
measures that assess spread in comparison to the typical size of data values include the coefficient of variation .
popular culture holds the year 2000 as the first year of the 21st century and the 3rd millennium , due to a tendency to group the years according to decimal values , as if year zero were counted .
i was lucky to be raised in a leftist family that believes in equality between men and women , and applies these values .
to solve either we must begin by knowing the values of the constants that enter into its expression .
urc building values limited , is an indian construction company based on erode .
here , again , we meet with a melancholy failure in the development of a true sense of values .
values in the range from 0 to 127 ( high-order bit is 0 ) indicate an error message , while values in the range from 128 to 255 ( high-order bit is 1 ) indicate an information message .
generations helped popularize the idea that people in a particular age group tend to share a distinct set of beliefs , attitudes , values and behaviors because they all grow up and come of age during a particular period in history .
she was instilled with values of devotion to shiva by her father from childhood .
18 , 21 , 30 where the old edition had a colon ) , all with distinct values .
in the vera place where a man loses what he values , there he should look to find it again .
that is philistine , it is the preference of material perfection to intellectual values .
formerly , we repeated the entire link for each combination of possible values .
on the other hand , he wrote about their sense of humanitarian values , their love , sorrows , their deep longing for a life as normal and beautiful as free women .
in such important matters of domestic economy as knowledge of food values and how to spend the family income to the best advantage , what but failure can be expected when a young woman worker graduates from mill labor to wifehood ?
this would give the simplest expression for the efficiency on the caloric theory , but the scale so obtained , when the values of carnot 's function were calculated from regnault 's observations on steam , was found to differ considerably from the scale of the mercury or air-thermometer .
the leiden scale was used to calibrate low-temperature indirect measurements in the early twentieth century , by providing conventional values ( in kelvins , then termed " degrees kelvin " ) of helium vapour pressure .
it was art ; though remote from life , it enhanced life 's values , and they witnessed it avidly .
for pressures above two atmospheres the following values give more accuracy to the calculation : — a = 10000 b = 1·421 m = 0·0023 .
those values are shown in green .
it concentrates the masses and the color , and so helps to distinguish the relative values .
in addition to offering behind-the-scenes glimpses into beyoncé 's intimate world on tour , the film also features performances of over twenty songs with staging , choreography , lighting and production values .
classification represents values of an agricultural economy , which winegrowers had a sense to , rightly , control .
careful study of the actual numerical values of these proportions led dalton to propose his law of multiple proportions .
the une education model values entrepreneurship , knowledge , culture , resourcefulness and social consciousness .
zen tradition values direct experience and communication over scriptures .
what he had formerly seen sensuously , the things whose values he had æsthetically estimated and transmuted , he now looks at from the intellectual side , that he may estimate their value morally .
genius draws around itself a magical circle , attracting and keeping by the force of its own magnetism those whom it values , but at the same time exercising an equally repellent effect on the envious and ignorant wandering beyond the pale of its charmed precincts .
over the next few weeks , he cut promos condemning the risqué content of wwf programming and preaching conservative values ( the gimmick was a mocking reference to the parents television council , which was publicly criticizing wwf content at the time ) .
delta omega values the advancement of public health education , practice and research and has therefore taken on an initiative to preserve public health classics .
xbrl validation ) , using constant values .
usually one is interested in the behavior of tλ for large values of λ .
the rest symbols of the larger values had a clear visual logic reflecting their time durations , based on the breve rest being a vertical stroke the length of one staff space .
the concept of loyalty is one of the prima facie absolute moral values .
the as-planned framework introduces additional schedule values of buffer , drift , and float .
it brings out values in colored pigment , emphasizes its violence and paves the way for a new tradition .
she is the author of making comparisons count , and the editor of the first volume on the topic of incommensurability of values in the anglo-american world , incommensurability , incomparability , and practical reason , and has authored numerous articles and book chapters .
wikimedia values and informed by my experiences here , and with the purpose of amplifying the voices of people advocating for the free and open internet .
mental and moral training , relative values of greek and chinese , 109-119 .
these philosophies have been elaborated on over time in order to form the values that underpin the codes of ethics issued by each national association .
this table shows the critical values and their effects for some organisms .
it is only when it believes something to be rare that the mind ceases to be miserly in assigning values .
every region over which it swept is blocked with heaps of unsightly ruins , it has depreciated all moral values .
* * * let us not underestimate this : _we ourselves_ , we free spirits , are already a `` transvaluation of all values , '' an incarnate declaration of war against and triumph over all old concepts of `` true '' and `` untrue . ''
a third implication is that value-neutral technocrats may find that they may have to dress up their policies with ideals , values and principles that enjoy popular appeal , in order to gain widespread acceptance of these policies and to ensure their successful implementation .
in his work on _education_ , herbert spencer states that `` acquirement of every kind has two values -- value as knowledge and value as discipline .
living nursing values in nursing practice .
these values are subject to trade-off by decision-makers or bargaining processes .
point values for us forces were also omitted from the game , restricting dyo ( design your own ) scenarios to non-american forces .
richardson tableaux in order to find the values of these coefficients .
they may not even realize that they are destroying anything worthwhile , for lack of a normal sense of values .
even in four dimensions , the set of possible ƒ-vectors of convex polytopes does not form a convex subset of the four-dimensional integer lattice , and much remains unknown about the possible values of these vectors .
as the cultural component of human empowerment , emancipative values are highly consequential in manifold ways .
i immediately thought of night of the living dead , the brain-child of ten friends who volunteered their time and money to make a film that transcended its minimal production values .
sr values will be different in the minerals , increasing in the same order .
this interview is another masterpiece of observation and dramatic values .
this one had no sort of conception of values .
the export values of wheat per bushel for the last six years , have been : -- 1909 $ 1.00 1910 1.00 1911 0.84 1912 0.95 1913 0.84 1914 0.82 wheat is bought and sold on what is known as the f.a.q .
rényi entropythe rényi entropy is a generalization of the shannon entropy to other values of q than unity .
they have never come to know the dignity of labor ; they have never been permitted to share its golden values and its lofty requitals .
salute amadis for me , and tell him i beseech him to remember all that past here ; and bear with the present , and give way for the future to my father , who still values and loves him .
the economists richard lipsey and kelvin lancaster showed in 1956 , that if one optimality condition in an economic model cannot be satisfied , it is possible that the next-best solution involves changing other variables away from the values that would otherwise be optimal .
the player in the balancing position , knows that the opener has made a non-forcing bid and that the opener 's partner has denied values required to respond .
the same reasoning applies to the production of the calendar as to that of all possible values .
frank wished to know the different sizes of pearls and their values .
the soldier of any nation was rather noisy , rather rough , and had no idea whatever of property values .
parameter calibration estimates the values of one or more unknown parameters in a mathematical model .
if values shift we 're in a position to unload -- but fast .
with daniel kiefer , chairman of the fels fund , and mrs. kiefer , mrs. fels is touring the principal cities of the united states in the interests of the idea to which joseph fels devoted his life , the taxation of land values .
it may be convenient to make the general correspondence that parameter values within a confidence interval are equivalent to those values that would not be rejected by a hypothesis test , but this would be dangerous .
the reason is that it would be absurd to imagine that goods which are nearly identical and even interchangeable should have different exchange values on the same market and especially for the same person .
it assumes that you want to fill your matrix with floating point ( real number ) values and that each line will consist solely of numbers separated by white space .
i think the cultures share a lot of similarities as far as family values and the love for flavor in their foods .
calculated values reflect fhwa policy of rounding down when distances fall exactly between increments .
members of a cultural group share a common identity , heritage , and values .
6_d._ =tables for engineers and mechanics= , giving the values of the different trains of wheels required to produce screws of any pitch .
other £1 values , in various colours and designs , command good prices , and should be carefully preserved , if only for speculative purposes .
friendship , in any society revolves around common shared values .
the java platform requires that wide character variables be defined as 16-bit values , and that characters be encoded using utf-16 ( due to former use of ucs-2 ) , while modern unix-like systems generally require 32-bit values encoded using utf-32 .
the report has become noted for one short section titled , " the implications of a discovery of extraterrestrial life , " which examines the potential implications of such a discovery on public attitudes and values .
for retention values in between , the clv formula tells us the appropriate multiplier .
poets and literary men in general exploit these emotional values that cling to words .
she certainly did not value our great nation , quite as much as it values itself , and in fact was rather an ardent spaniard , though herself of mixed race .
how could this be remedied but by altering the figures of the wergeld and the compositions for wounds , and inserting silver values instead of the gold ones ?
after the divorce , lisa king , wanted to instill farming values in her kids so she purchased farm land .
movement in the air gives this sense enormous and manifold values .
such a situation can directly lead to the overindulgence of the child thus reversing traditional confucian values of ren ( 仁 ) and filial piety ( xiao 孝 ) .
the lower values , compared with each other , must show themselves for what they are , must come vividly into consciousness , must be felt and desired _in order that_ they may be _compared_ , -- not in order that they may be !
the table serves , however , as an index to the relative values of the fuels under ordinary conditions without compression .
ka values for triphosphoric acid .
though unconsciously , the man conforming to a custom is considering his fellows , and the values and traditions which have become current among them .
this is so because any test can only reject a value it is given , not any future ones ( there is no cut mechanism here , in prolog terms - a generator in general might produce its values unordered , like e .
the diagonal entries of σ are called the singular values of a .
then it is determined whether or not the net revenue is paying interest on a capitalized value greater than that indicated by the sum of the physical and business values .
if the center is predicted to be off by 3 on both the x and y axis this reduces the size of the accumulator array to about 6 billion values .
this basic functionality is used for implementing gvalue , a type of generic container that can hold values of any type known by the type system .
during the last two millennia , the manifestation has absorbed other symbolic values , such as the renunciation of idols and the stigmatization of old age .
i like clean values .
the religion was a " blend of maori and judeo-christian values " , and believers held that they were the descendants of the ten lost israelite tribes , which led them to observe the jewish sabbath , as opposed to the christian sabbath .
for purposes of reference , we reproduce the principal roman and old german scales , in so far as they are used by agricola in this work , with their values in english .
one of the other candidates in the race discovers that santana is a lesbian , and uses this to attack sue on the issue of " family values " for appointing her a cheerleading captain , and to imply that sue herself is a lesbian .
torreton powerfully embodies the film 's central questions of what a fighter becomes without combat and where the values inherent in savage battle may lead .
in these there is so much orchestral pomp , so much external splendor , so much scenic embellishment , so much that is attractive to both eye and ear , that delight in them may exist independently of a recognition of their deeper values .
the owner must do his own conjecturing as to future comparative values of the species .
utterly discrepant values of the microscopic displacements designed to serve as sounding lines for the solar system , issued from attempts to measure even the most promising pictures .
some were tactful and clever in appreciation of other values than a mere readiness to salute , and those drew our affection and a ready measure of confidence .
god values .
normally ) it has 48 cards at most ( 12 values instead of 13 ) , but often it skips the 8 and 9 and only consists of 40 cards .
the ordering of the face values is a little different from most american card games - the deuce ( 2 ) is the highest value and is unbeatable .
it is found that their values systematically differ from the visual magnitudes , so that for type b ( and o ) the photographic magnitudes are smaller than the visual , and the contrary for the other types .
president sarkozy said the aim was to deny the entry of certain people to france who did not share the country 's values and that , " it 's not just linked to toulouse .
the award lost much of its meaning and eventually was discontinued for many years but has been brought back to camp and has been completely redesigned to embody many of the core values to which it was created in the first place .
but he has not a particle of ambition , though he values his profession mightily .
hilles. -- see the round table for december 17 , 1895 , and january 14 , 1896 , for values of u.s. coins .
these over-personal values increase as the soul passes along the upward path and as it grants a self-subsistence and unconditional significance to these values .
however , his values and beliefs did not change .
at the same time , the prosperity of the farmers and the enormous rise in ground values which accompanied the economic advance of the country removed some of the most potent causes of the discontent on which populism thrived .
`` you see life always through a stained-glass window and it gives you distorted values .
corresponding to the argument log x it gives the values of log ( 1 + x^-1 ) and log ( 1 + x ) .
the psi chart below is grouped by index values and descriptors , according to the national environment agency .
it shows the clash of values and ethics between people of small towns and metropolis .
he differs from the ordinary pedant in so far as he values theories not in proportion to their dusty antiquity , but in proportion to their unreality , the pure whimsicality and irrationality of the heads which contained them .
the bolivarian spirit sets as the institution 's mission the integral formation through evangelization of the culture , constant research of truth through science and confirmation of the human values from christianity for the good of society .
there is also the echo chamber effect - bush values loyalty , and surrounds himself with people who have a similar mindset ( as do most people ) .
âryabhatta ] who is said to give a near approach to the true relation among the various values for the computations of the value of π , the author of _the source of measures_ reproduces a curious statement .
you lose your sense of values when there is death and damnation going all around you , get to feeling you have a right to take anything that comes your way to even it up .
person-centred thinking is a set of values , skills and tools used in person centred planning and in the personalisation of services used by people who need supports provided by social or health care .
if it fails , everyone will think that values in lattimore are unstable and fictitious , and so many people will try to sell out that we shall have a smashing of values , and possibly a panic .
in 1938 the japanese rejected hosting the games because they saw the olympics and its pacifist values as ' an effete form of european culture ' .
his theory of relative values has been misunderstood and misinterpreted , but to see him in his true light it is necessary to consider how many of his successors could paint a large figured picture on anything approaching the same scale with an equal measure of intelligence .
aware of the multifarious multiplicities of her responses to another and at once to the surrounding field of action , the nurse selects and overtly expresses her responses that actualize the purpose , values , and potential of the artful science of professional nursing .
more unusual values for trivial .
every opportunity of communion with him the believer values as a privilege .
the fixed points are generally independent of the initial values of the parameters over a large range of the initial values .
i 'll request a similar report from wikdiata , but there may be values recorded here and not there , or vice versa .
concord acts as a platform for common action at european level , based on the values of respect for the diversity of its membership , the complementarity of expertise , mutual confidence , participation , accountability and transparency .
i shall tell ethelbertha that i have come to the conclusion a man never values happiness that is always with him .
in popular tools for coloured petri nets such as cpn tools , the values of tokens are typed , and can be tested ( using guard expressions ) and manipulated with a functional programming language .
and if he be higher than strong he values not it , but the exercise of getting it ; viewing his actual achievement , he is apt to reflect , `` is this pitiful thing , then , all that i toiled for ? ''
the threatened encroachment of a few weeks previous , and the causes of demand , as explained by their guests , threw a new light on range values and made the boys doubly cautious .
such export signatures are specific for types , values , functions and operations and each of these are started with the corresponding keyword .
with higher market values , it _would_ pay , but less handsomely than other fields a. o. and g. can work .
while it is an encyclopædia of law and business containing items such as a comparison of the values of money of all lands , it is very readable and entertaining .
kennedy still regularly attends mass and professes that her catholicism " remains very much part of who i am " , even though she eschews its more traditional values .
one can browse through the various dimensions of a data array , taking a look at the raw data values .
in mathematics , it generally indicates a choice of exactly two possible values , one of which is the negation of the other .
example values are from his paper .
about two years ago the firm purchased a site on the corner of harrison and second streets but they sold it again last year taking advantage of a decided rise in real estate values .
note : a poker hand is played with a poker deck , composed of fifty-two cards , of thirteeen values , each card value being represented once in each of four `` suits '' , namely spades , hearts , diamonds , and clubs .
the presence of painted records may be questioned , but their value as records is undoubted , seeing that they give colour , atmosphere , and have other interpretative values which are absent from the more meticulously accurate photograph .
it was a change in values .
the reactivity is enhanced when the thiol is ionized , and cysteine residues in proteins have pka values close to neutrality , so are often in their reactive thiolate form in the cell .
the coins are denominated at 1 , 5 , 10 , and 25 cents and are pegged to the corresponding values in united states currency .
the official statement of the values represented in foreign commerce will show the unprecedented magnitude to which the movement has attained , and the protection thus secured to the public interests at the time when commercial security has become indispensable .
fir filter stage must be evaluated once using the final two outputs from the iir filter stage , while for computational efficiency the iir filter iteration discards its output values .
embodying the quaker values of morality and public service , vaux helped found pennsylvania 's public-school system ( and for fourteen years held the first presidency of the board of public schools of philadelphia ) , and at one time was a member of more than fifty philanthropic societies .
an aggregate whose elements are real numbers is said to `` extend to infinite values '' if , after any number n , however great , is specified , it is possible to find in the aggregate numbers which exceed n in absolute value .
bootstrapping ( a statistical resampling strategy ) is used to provide branch support values .
there comes a moment in your existence beyond which all earthly values fail ; and many a man has wakened up in such a time to find that he has sold out for eternity , and has nothing to show for it .
the end of the 19th century was a period of political change in japan as cultural values moved from the enthusiastic adoption of western ideas to a newly discovered interest in japanese heritage .
like stevens , he used precise outlines , a profusion of details and yet with all a poetic atmosphere that is produced principally by a beautiful juxtaposition of colour values .
the boundary layer tends to have higher moisture values and greater aerosol amounts which results in higher scattering of light within the boundary layer .
for spirituality , as we have seen all along , must not be a lovely fluid notion or a merely self-regarding education ; but an education for action , for the insertion of eternal values into the time-world , in conformity with the incarnational philosophy which justifies it .
then he began : “ don ’ t you see that your values are all wrong ?
this includes values such as numbers of all sorts , strings , identifier names , references to classes and methods , and type descriptors .
this would necessitate reading all of its texels and combining their values to correctly determine the pixel color , a prohibitively expensive operation .
recognized facts in common experience only need be appealed to , though different values will have to be placed upon some of these facts as their importance is made plain .
the market proved to be quite active -- so much so that they disposed of their entire flock at high cash values without the least difficulty .
[ footnote 126 : the roman _denarius_ , which has been here and later translated _denier_ , may be considered for the purpose of comparing values as , roughly , the equivalent of the modern franc , or lira , say 20 cents united states money . ]
the energy values ( points on the hyper-surface ) along the reaction coordinate result in a 1-d energy surface ( a line ) and when plotted against the reaction co-ordinate ( energy vs reaction coordinate ) gives what is called a reaction co-ordinate diagram ( or energy profile ) .
so only the coefficients a , b and c have an impact on the steepness of the curve ( the greater these values are , the greater the steepness ; the smaller these values are , the greater the flatness ) .
the design , as we stated last month in noticing the 15c -- the first of the set to appear -- bears a resemblance to that of the lower values of nova scotia , but shows the queen 's head turned to the right .
=another great advance is the change in what makes up the chief values of life.= -- in early times the values of life were largely found in food , clothing , personal ornaments , bodily comfort , sex gratifications .
[ # ] it will not work because the moral values of people are not determinable .
having determined values for all of the unknowns on page 138 , we can now say that if the number 31,741 be counted forward from the date 4 ahau 8 cumhu , the date 12 imix 14 kayab will be reached .
everyone ( myself included ) values " more transparency " , so that 's not anything unusual .
in consequence there came an entire readjustment of values .
beauty of line and texture will not redeem a drawing in which the values are badly disposed , for upon them we depend for the effect of unity , or the pictorial quality .
nunberg contends that conservatives have used these terms to paint a picture of elite liberals out of touch with the values of mainstream , middle-class americans .
they are all stamped for their respective values , and the stamps are cancelled by guido 's signature . ''
she had a keen appreciation of worldly values which led her always to select the best material for her clothes , and another feeling of their expensiveness which resulted in her being always a little belated in the styles .
tea ) or 4-aminopyridine ( 4-ap ) ( ic50 values are 0 .
these stereotypes may be disproportionately well known to people worldwide , due to the transmission of us culture and values via the export of us made films and television shows .
the goal is to have the columns sort only by the values in the data row while each entry 's nonsorting annotation row remains directly beneath the data row .
douglas crockford advocates the terms " truthy " and " falsy " to describe how values of various types behave when evaluated in a logical context , especially in regard to edge cases .
this is an opportunity for iran to continue its path of self dependency , in line with the virtues and values of society within the educational sector .
`` memory is not a pocket , but a living instructor , with a prophetic sense of the values which he guards ; a guardian angel set there within you to record your life , and by recording it to animate you to uplift it . ''
while the canadian charter of rights and freedoms applies only to government actions , one scholar cites dobson as an example of how " the courts have undoubtedly promoted flexible charter values in private law cases since 1982 .
in the second , our object is to _find the values_ of the formulas thus obtained ; that is , to determine directly the values of the numbers sought , which are already represented by certain explicit functions of given numbers : this is the _arithmetical_ question .
this commentary of the law is allegorical in the sense that beneath the particular law the interpreter constantly reveals a spiritual idea , but it is not allegorical in the sense that he makes an exchange of values .
typical values of mdr width are 32 and 64 bits , which would allow us to fetch , in a single step , either an integer or a real value .
the point of bringing in immortal , indestructible robots is to show there would be no reason for them to have any values , preferences , or moral code by their nature .
heavy-ion collisions might be able to measure its position experimentally , but this will require scanning across a range of values of μ and t .
what are the school days for unless they are to teach you values , to show you which things are of most worth ?
the intimacy and close propinquity of the domestic drama exaggerates all its values , both positive and negative . ''
the valuation list contains the descriptions and rateable values of all tenements that have been assessed to rates .
mr. rawn spoke largely , finely , with a nice appreciation of all values .
i have learned values . ''
he fought for liberal and free-trade values .
however , because of mergers between these two sounds between early and late middle chinese , the chinese phonologists who created the rime tables could rely only on tradition to tell what the respective values of these two consonants were ; evidently they were accidentally reversed at one stage .
the values for these extras or changes in the work may be determined by a submitted estimate and acceptance in a lump sum , by a unit price named in the contract or subsequently agreed upon , or by the cost and percentage , or by the fixed-fee method .
all the new religions were not taken literally but instead interpreted by the javanese according to the javanese traditional values , creating a new set of religious beliefs unique to local culture .
additionally in these modes , options called " norma " and " ojama " may be used to add point values to the player 's challenge score .
in digital circuits , one-hot refers to a group of bits among which the legal combinations of values are only those with a single high ( 1 ) bit and all the others low ( 0 ) .
by contrast , the strongest emphasis on secular-rational values and self-expression values is found in the protestant societies of northern europe .
multiply these figures by twenty , at least , to represent modern values : we have then , a mass sung for five pence ; a baptism for £3 : 4 : 8 ; and a marriage for very nearly seven pounds .
the institute seeks opportunities to collaborate with all branches of the vincentian family in the united states , to build upon shared values and traditions .
the values of insolation at the earth 's surface , after passage through the atmosphere , have been calculated .
fletcher has repeatedly said that his departure from the republican party was due to extreme partisan politics and to the party 's shift away from his core values .
mrs. mortimer 's bitterly acquired sense of values revolted at this .
the values of 10 × 19 , 68 × 61 , 27 × 25 , all divided by 105 ?
hitherto , moral values have been the highest values : does anybody doubt this ?
getting through and behind the most visible and obvious of the worlds one was in the sphere of true values ; they lay all about , shining in unveiled strangeness , eternally and unalterably lit .
the aim is to elicit inspirational responses from people , in order to understand their culture , thoughts and values better , and thus stimulate designer 's imaginations .
the last case arises when we consider the finite values of z for which the polynomial coefficient of s^n vanishes .
in the seventies inglehart began developing an influential theory of generational replacement causing intergenerational value change from materialist to post-materialist values that helped shape the eurobarometer surveys , the world values surveys and other cross-national survey projects .
they were sure to have crowds of people visiting them the first two or three days the store was opened , because they always offered as leaders some tremendous values .
* * * * * annual values of farm products , and losses chargeable to insect pests .
more for rivets in double shear , though the two latter values may probably approach those for wrought iron in steel of the higher grades sometimes used in bridge-work .
`` so far , i 've just been trying to analyze them for phonetic values .
mr. cole 's poetical future is bright indeed , for he possesses an innate conception of fitness and poetic values which too few of his contemporaries can boast .
any widespread social habit becomes weighted with emotional values for its members .
in their way , these moments are true values -- both of them .
he also credits his time in the far east , where he was excited by the look of japan , as well as " the concern for art values " that was part of the japanese people 's way of life .
in this way professor barnard , late of the lick observatory , determined the following values for the diameters of the four first discovered minor planets : -- ceres 485 miles .
r-values per inch given in si and imperial units ( typical values are approximations , based on the average of available results .
truth may conflict with many other values .
the original values are obliterated by black bars , printed across the sheet .
this posthumous queen 's head stamp was of similar design to the other values of the numeral series and had the same sheet arrangement and marginal inscriptions .
it is but the tool by which values are conveyed , and no more productive than baskets or crates or sacks .
at the long end , a regression technique with a cost function that values smoothness might be used .
hegar is a conservative , who claims to defend " the values of faith , family , and freedom .
rössler attractor 's behavior is largely a factor of the values of its constant parameters a , b , and c .
`` the determination of physical values . ''
the first to call attention to the importance of the theory of uniform convergence of series in connexion with fourier's series was stokes , in his memoir `` on the critical values of the sums of periodic series '' ( _camb .
conversion of values from one mixed base to another is easily accomplished by first converting the place values of the one system into the other , and then applying the digits from the one system against these .
the absurdity involved in the notion of greater or smaller values is , in short , the assumption that an individual may be _at the same moment_ under different conditions .
by holding the before and after values in computer memory , comparing them , and only resetting those sub-pixels that actually changed , the amount of time spent charging and discharging the capacitors was reduced .
interestingly , this shows that children are largely malleable in their emotions , and suggests that it takes a period of time for cultural values to become ingrained .
the samoan girl was not pressured to choose from among a variety of conflicting values , as was the american girl .
all his wrath , she continues , was reserved for `` st. paul and his like , '' who perverted the beatitudes , which christ intended for the lowly only , into a universal religion which made war upon aristocratic values .
person as caring implies person in community , connected in oneness with others and with the universe , person freely choosing the living of values which are expressions of caring .
a dramatic rise in land values on some islands , while increasing the worth of gullah holdings , led to increased taxes and many gullah were forced to sell their land .
all the other values were made up in sheets of 100 only .
a man who lives within the sphere of the kula can not become permanently and sentimentally attached to certain of his possessions , in spite of the fact that he values them most of all .
this is a matter that deserves reflective discussion by our society in recognition of our values and beliefs .
this value was created by the producers , but far from owning or even sharing in it , they were compelled to pay heavier and heavier tribute in the form of rent for the very values which they had created .
whether or not he found little of value , the appraiser's general line of procedure was not radically different from that followed in michigan and wisconsin in getting all available data first from the companies , then in making a field inspection before fixing values .
when we test fats for fuel values by means of a calorimeter ( fig .
[ 6 ] he gives a very extensive table for mammals , their brain weight , their body weight , and the values of 2 parameters for their specification .
there is another disadvantage associated with incorrect sets of angle values , as the colors will look dimmer due to overlapping .
in their view , these were inevitable backlashes from the muslim community to the legal changes , as the tanzimat 's values were imposed from above and did not reflect those of society .
it is something else again to be willing to change these by giving ourselves to a responsible consideration of what god wants his church to be and to do _now_ , and thus attempt the reunion in response to present and future values .
i think that when searching wp , values such as " 1st " , " 2nd " , " 3rd " , etc .
the hamming weight or population count operation that counts the number of nonzero bits in a sequence of binary values may also be interpreted as a conversion from unary to binary numbers .
the attempt is not likely to yield an entirely satisfactory result , but what is significant is that as soon as two or more radical concepts are put before the human mind in immediate sequence it strives to bind them together with connecting values of some sort .
rgb has a nonlinear intensity curve which is only defined for values from 0 .
it is proof positive when a suitor gives cattle for his sweetheart , first , that he is wealthy ; and , second , that he greatly values the lady he fain would make his bride .
if only the second and third conditions of the definition of measure above are met , and takes on at most one of the values , then is called a signed measure .
indeed , legal tender notes have become the universal measure of values .
`` by the time i returned with the bed to the four-pair back attic i had received a better lesson in human values than in any previous half-hour of my existence .
during war , new values -- are they better values ? -- are found for many things .
books for him are not objects for speculation , but gilt-edged values .
measurements under constant pressure produce larger values than those at constant volume because the constant pressure values also include heat energy that is used to do work to expand the substance against the constant pressure as its temperature increases .
the individual is supremely important to himself , and he values his friends and relations and so on , but abstract affection for humanity at large or belief in the sanctity of the lives of people with whom he is unrelated and unacquainted , the african barely possesses .
lcp ( plcp ) array , in which the values appear in text order rather than lexicographical order .
standards and values .
is his setting significant for one scene only or has it symbolic values for the whole play ?
the penny was no longer the only silver coin , and gold coins of several different sizes and values were in circulation .
the difference between the standard of value ( common measure of values ) function , and the medium of exchange function is particularly well illustrated by scott , _loc .
psychologically , the one had its strongest root in the temper which reasons , and values ideas ; the other in that which feels , and values emotions .
finally , the last term involves a product of two fluctuation values .
hence their knowledge and command of energies unfamiliar to us -- and hence also the question whether they may not have an entirely different sense of values , of justice -- and that is rather terrifying , '' i concluded .
on the contrary , gold and silver , as elementary substances , are always the same , and equal quantities of them represent , therefore , values of equal magnitude .
from a man who -- but too fatally for his peace -- values me more than his life ? '
_the values of mutuality_ personal growth is nurtured best in relationships in which the quality of mutuality makes growth a possibility for both the child and the parent , the pupil and the teacher .
it may represent either an enrichment or a depletion of ore values , depending on whether the ore minerals are taken into solution less rapidly or more rapidly than the associated minerals and rocks ; all are removed to some extent .
supporters have appealed to the first amendment as well as the opportunity for muslims to demonstrate peaceful islamic values and for americans to reassert their commitment to tolerance and diversity .
many white rhodesians had seen themselves as nothing less than fully fledged members of the british empire , carrying on the same rugged values and frontier spirit of the early englishmen who had settled in 1890 .
table 2 shows the calculated values used to develop figure 8 .
each domain consists of a pair of opposing values or motives , so that only one of each pair can be experienced in any given moment .
reading from left to right : the values are 1 , 3 , 4 , 5 , 6 , 9 , 10 . ]
he values the day ’ s work of an ox at 20 sous , and that of the labourer at 5 sous , with his food .
however , the entropy values for each model are not equal at the sonic state .
as it is much easier to compare different lengths by expressing them in a common language of feet and inches , so it is much easier to compare values by means of a common language of pounds , shillings , and pence .
it places the accident of birth above a man 's values and duty to the tribe above a man 's right to his own life .
the use of coloured inks , which are solely meant to modify certain values that black or white would not express to rodin 's mind , has given rise to mistakes .
the constitution includes legislation that was specifically written as constitutional documents , statutes that have become entrenched since their original creation , some ancient treaties and royal proclamations , unwritten procedures adopted from the british parliamentary system of government , and unwritten underlying values .
the set-theoretical strength of counting is less important in practice than the convenience of not having to annotate variables known to have natural number values ( or related kinds of values ) with singleton brackets , or to apply the t operation in order to get stratified set definitions .
all values are in tonnes uranium ( not uranium oxide ) .
liberal nationalism is a kind of nationalism defended recently by political philosophers who believe that there can be a non-xenophobic form of nationalism compatible with liberal values of freedom , tolerance , equality , and individual rights .
according to a researcher at the university of vienna , popularity of korean dramas have their foundation in confucian values they transmit , which asian viewers can easily identify with .
conservatives argue that this is about redefining marriage and family , a paradigm shift in perspective and the latest symptom of a general malaise regarding traditional family values .
again , there are many who do care , and care greatly , who would yet utterly repudiate the doctrine that the highest æsthetic values were in any sense dependent on a spiritual view of the universe .
it would be difficult to imagine a more interesting and instructive history than the history of values in painting .
this nickname is believed to have been derived from the children 's comic book character rupert bear who epitomises traditional public school values and from the purported preponderance of that particular forename amongst young men from a public school background .
crowds are notoriously anæsthetic toward the finer values of art , music , and poetry .
this work also includes a guide for estimating values of the books in this series , however it has remained elusive as many boy scout collectors refuse to share or assimilate the copyrighted work .
nor were there property values printed on spaces on the board .
david hiltbrand of people wrote , " this hackneyed attempt to blend hollywood glamor with family values is cosmetically appealing , but underneath that veneer crawl the worms of artifice , predictability and bad acting .
for a brief period in late december 2004 , asteroid ( then known only by its provisional designation ) held the record for palermo scale values , with a value of 1 .
the larger of these two approximate values is the only one usually learned and employed .
staple productions fell to less than half of their former price ; land values declined fifty to seventy per cent .
this spring i will send you a comprehensive welfare reform bill that builds on the family support act of 1988 and restores the basic values of work and responsibility .
in 2006 , the bbc reported that maciej giertych , an mep of the clerical-nationalist league of polish families , had expressed admiration for franco , stating that he " guaranteed the maintenance of traditional values in europe " .
hippie fashion and values had a major effect on culture , influencing popular music , television , film , literature , and the arts .
what it has done i have attempted to put down in some detail , and to put values upon , in the following pages .
this may appear a simple matter until we reflect that most men measure life by what others have said or written concerning life 's values .
bawer compares this approach unfavorably with what he sees as a more robust american tradition which proudly asserts its values and expects immigrants to adopt them .
whole life insurance alternative , where there is any need for permanent death benefits , but little or no need for cash surrender values , then a current assumption ul or gul may be an appropriate alternative , with potentially lower net premiums .
in common with conservatism , traditional moral values ( on marriage , abortion , etc .
love is a word very loosely used ; there are people who will say they love new potatoes ; there are a multitude of loves of different colours and values .
in a trimmed estimator , the extreme values are discarded ; in a winsorized estimator , the extreme values are instead replaced by certain percentiles ( the trimmed minimum and maximum ) .
disclosure may include sharing both high-risk and low-risk information as well as personal experiences ideas and attitudes , feelings and values , past facts and life stories , and even future hopes , dreams , ambitions , and goals .
however several of the examples below rely on the fact that many expressions do not immediately return success or failure , returning values in the meantime .
if this iteration converges the values of v _ d become closer and closer together as the process continues , and we can stop iteration when the accuracy is sufficient .
that in which all values within certain assigned limits are equally probable .
this ratio , termed by guye the critical coefficient , has the following approximate values : -- double triple c. h. cl .
the data given in the following tables is such as will furnish a fair knowledge of the relative heating values of coals from the principal mining areas of the united states .
the functions would even have had return values , where if raw mode was simply not supported , a call to setrawmode ( ) would have returned an erroneous status code and remained in cooked mode .
he preferred the spiritual values to material goods , while serving the people was the greatest happiness for him .
the combatants then add their attack values to their roll .
wealth is exchanged without both parties to the transaction receiving fair values .
in the mathematical subfield numerical analysis , tricubic interpolation is a method for obtaining values at arbitrary points in 3d space of a function defined on a regular grid .
it was once pointed out to tennyson that he had scrupulously conformed , in a certain poem , to a number of rules of versification and to certain principles in the use of different sound values .
as stamps would stick together while being kept , those having greater values are not covered with gum .
since all the men of a single civilization represent space in the same way , it is clearly necessary that these sympathetic values , and the distinctions which depend upon them , should be equally universal , and that almost necessarily implies that they be of social origin .
shipments from united kingdom in various years , values of , i .
puritan values of hard work , moral uprightness , and education remain a part of boston 's culture .
our company is able and willing to pay liberally for its right of way ; and you must remember that the coming of the railroad will treble and quadruple your land values .
its arrival altered all my values .
10. review , -- to find sequences combining three chromas , five values , and ten hues .
stock has written works on the impact and significance of recent advances in technology and the life sciences , and several bestsellers on values and ethics .
plutarchian comparisons between the men of different centuries are of little avail in determining true values .
to make the clouds glow from within as the eev entered the atmosphere , the painting 's values were digitally reversed and animated frame-by-frame .
leverage points are those observations , if any , made at extreme or outlying values of the independent variables such that the lack of neighboring observations means that the fitted regression model will pass close to that particular observation .
of course it would have been better if there had been three hundred dead bodies or three dead bodies -- but the principle holds good -- let the moral plates be cast and the huge moral values follow with comparatively little individual moral hand labour .
) < /fld > , < cd > a calculus founded on the properties of the successive values of variable quantities and their differences or increments .
similarly for different values of r1 very high η is possible to achieve .
vo2max of submaximal exercise , music has an ergogenic effect by decreasing rpe values at any given point of the exercise .
these values refer to beijing dialect ; other dialects may be slightly different .
american patriotism has been identified by some as distinct from american nationalism because of the emphasis of american patriotism upon values rather than a commitment to a nation .
together they undertake campaigns for the purpose of improving and extending operational opportunities , and the quality and importance of development cooperation ; strengthening the knowledge , values and specific expertise of the ngos involved [ 2 ] .
the more a domain name is generic and says about the website , the more values it adds to your website .
the mintmaster , and goldsmith , in their mixture of metals , either of diuerse kindes , or diuerse values : how are they , or may they , exactly be directed , and meruailously pleasured , if _arithmetike_ be their guide ?
establishing and reinforcing common values is necessary , according to perelman , because they influence action and determine acceptable behaviour ( 2001 , p .
these values are quite high , compared with ordinary glass at 1 .
consequently , property values in the area have increased year-over-year since 2005 , causing renewed interest in economic investment in the area while furthering the demographic shift of the area .
specially large values of i+ and i- have been observed at high levels in balloon ascents .
kumarappa worked to combine christian and gandhian values of " trusteeship " , non-violence and a focus on human dignity and development in place of materialism as the basis of his economic theories .
it gives the probabilities of various values of the variables in the subset without reference to the values of the other variables .
table 2. -- _general characteristics of the continental rise northwest africa sector_ values measured from profiles e-11 to e-21 ==================================================================== depth segment upper edge lower edge gradient width ==================================================================== upper continental rise 1 1200 ± 200 1500 ± 200 1:90 ± 30 30 ± 10 ?
natasha demkina ) is one of the spiritual values that we must cherish if we are to succeed as the dominant rational species of this world .
sometimes lost the true perspective and failed to recognize relative values .
some boot loaders make adjustments or refuse to pass control to a boot sector depending on certain values detected here ( e .
although a camera may have a dynamic range of 5 or more stops , when image data is recorded digitally the highest ( brightest ) stop uses fully half of the discrete tonal values .
four of the values were reissued with color changes in 1900 , and several were surcharged in 1904 and again in 1912 .
although mat 's family is depicted to follow the rules of the malay patriarchal society , modern values are in its portrayal .
as the value of the italian lira declined in the years since world war ii , new denominations in progressively higher values were introduced , with the lower values dropping off .
this program provides the knowledge , skills , values and perspectives required of people who are about to assume leadership and managerial positions in educational institutions .
he believed that if men could be induced to adopt the true standard of values , economic relations would adjust themselves .
obama on their family values without implying that they are somehow right-wing .
this interface is termed the " customization wizard " , and it creates a user layer which stores the user 's preferred values of the properties .
digital filters that require finite numbers of future values can be implemented while the analog counterparts cannot .
this model treats ' the crowd ' as a unit in its composition and robs every individual member of their opinions , values and beliefs .
stumpage values will increase .
reviewing the book group for the guardian , gareth mclean stated " the acting is as cracking as the script and the production values " and described the show as " a genuine ensemble drama in which everyone plays a vital part " .
the values of the extraordinary and ordinary refractive indices range between 1·614 and 1·638 , and 1·633 and 1·669 respectively ; the double refraction , therefore , is fairly large , amounting to 0·025 , and , since the ordinary exceeds the extraordinary ray , its character is negative .
he impressed upon his pupils the virtue of economy , and the values of things and words : he explained where a meagreness and tenuity of diction was fitting , and where copiousness or even excess should be allowed , and the advantage of due measure everywhere .
the member churches have engaged on issues of public policy and moral values , including the adoption of the " social creed of the churches " in 1908 , a document addressing the moral and ethical issues facing society , updated by the ncc general assembly in 2007 .
as counter-intuitive as this may seem to those accustomed to neoclassical price theory , some empirical evidence suggests values are a better predictor of empirically recorded prices than prediction by any other means .
the _annuaire statistique de la france , 1917_ , values the entire house property of france at $ 11,900,000,000 ( 59.5 milliard francs ) .
depicts the political values of kerala during the independence movement .
the list included the book among its " 100 best scottish books of all time " , dubbing it " a deliberation on how traditional masculine values find a place in modern society " .
the materialist philosophies would then have been presented as inevitably arising when intellectual values are made supreme ; and the idealist philosophies as equally cogent when moral values are taken as primary and are allowed to determine speculative tenets .
the ultimate values in any event , it is apparent that where research is concerned -- and especially space research with its broad scale of inquiry -- we can not always see the value of scientific endeavor on the basis of its beginning .
and it was a kind of a song written about us , as a gang , it was written about the values we stood for .
hartmut of normandy comes to woo her in person , and is kindly received by her ; she , however , begs him , if he values his life , to leave the court .
their aspirations , their valor , their patriotism , had all exhaled -- volatile essences , these incomparable values ! -- and now their bodies , weighted with death , cumbered the earth .
the quintessence of the honor was all there ; there was no difference in values ; in truth there was no difference present except an artificial one -- clothes .
the real purchasing-power of fixed payments is eroded by inflation unless they are inflation-adjusted to keep their real values constant .
there was a similar debate about gerald rudolf ford , father of president ford , and the consensus was that a person who raised , and helped shape the values of , a future president is notable if for that reason alone .
probably neither statement is wholly in accordance with facts , as there must have been a great many plates of the 1 cent and 3 cent stamps , with proportionately fewer for the less used values .
i have no definite ideas about the values of houses , but i think i can pay that .
games have 20 questions , with point values of 10 , 20 , or 30 points depending on the difficulty .
constant flaws can be found on most values , some of them being catalogued by stanly gibbons for the first time in 2013 .
by 1929 , the extra income from the rooftop bleachers actually caused real estate values to climb on the 2700 block of n .
the instructions must name these values in order to distinguish them from one another .
al-qaradawi said , " rushdie disgraced the honor of the prophet and his family and defiled the values of islam , " but he never backed the fatwa calling for his death .
i warned you for your own good , and i am not a man who values any of this earth 's empty bubbles so highly as not to say my mind when i am sure that it is right .
to indicate the increase in real estate values since the war , the land of this crossman property lying nearest the northern boundary of the village sells for one thousand dollars and upward per acre .
ngo monitor states that its mission is to " end the practice used by certain self-declared ' humanitarian ngos ' of exploiting the label ' universal human rights values ' to promote politically and ideologically motivated agendas " .
the history behind the name is not in line with today 's university of texas and its core values .
biological integrity is built on the assumption that a decline in the values of an ecosystem 's functions are primarily caused by human activity or alterations .
while the calorific values of the different gases given in the accompanying table are approximately correct for gases burning in the open air at atmospheric pressure they develop widely different values in the cylinder of an engine because of the effects of compression and preheating .
the bond of the proprietor is a general bond and usually covers what might be considered a fair amount of total values due the government at any time .
the manifestation called the cultural summer of zvornik usually takes place in august , and its main objective is to become a traditional cultural event which will open the doors of zvornik for the recognized cultural values .
contrary to the young slovenes , who were critical towards the catholic hierarchy , the old slovenes promoted traditional values , such as family , religion , and loyalty to the habsburg dynasty , on an austroslavist background .
there also seems to be little opportunity for a merge or redirect , as the difference between the two is entirely in the prefilled values for the parameters of .
if we expand the right hand side , we obtain one term that is entirely dependent on the mean values of the spins , and independent of the spin configurations .
in the capable new york stenographer , who estimated values coldly and got the most for the least outlay , there was something left that belonged to another kind of woman -- something that liked the very things in percy that were not good business assets .
assuming that an equal number of the smaller positive values are due to the same cause , and subtracting these thirty stars from the total number , we shall have sixty-two stars left of which the parallax is real and generally amounts to 0″.05 , more or less .
exploring the latter option led us to swarajya , a once vibrant journal that championed economic freedom and liberal values in nehruvian india but stopped printing in 70 's .
benjamin franklin's philosophy was far from grasping the best of life , yet we remember him better than we do our emerson , whose plea for spiritual values as the only real ones is lost in the louder and louder groaning of the wheels of our machinery .
san francisco waldorf grade school is a non-sectarian school with a commitment to engaging san francisco 's diverse cultures , religions , languages , and values .
on the same basis , what would land be worth that produces 40 bushels of corn and equivalent values of other crops ?
in particular he had noticed that the construction of railroads in california was increasing land values and rents as fast as or faster than wages were rising .
it is beyond dispute that these forms originate at an early age ; they are subsequently often developed in boyhood and youth so as to include the higher numbers , and , among mathematical students , the negative values .
the term " fluffy bunny " is used as a derogatory slur within the contemporary pagan religion of wicca to refer to practitioners whose adherence to the faith is perceived as being superficial and dominated by consumerist values .
substituting for sin u and sin u´ the values found above , we obtain p´/p = c´ sin i/c sin i´ = n´c´/nc .
the anova tests the null hypothesis that samples in two or more groups are drawn from populations with the same mean values .
the school values industry relevant andup to date courses , ranging from vocational education and training through to tertiary education , where students study in modern facilities with staff , who have a wide range of teaching and industry experience .
the mirroring happens at the center of the whole object and its effective dimensions will retain the original values of the object as if unmirrored , so you may adjust the position and padding to avoid unwanted overlapping .
the lake is broadly divided into four zones on the basis of salinity values , namely the southern , central , northern and outer channel .
and when this house shall have done its work , when it shall have brought back values to their proper standard , it will deserve a monument . ''
the calorific values of carburetted acetylene ( caro ) , and those of other gaseous fuels are : large calories per _ cubic foot .
[ sidenote : 1123b ] well then , he is thought to be great-minded who values himself highly and at the same time justly , because he that does so without grounds is foolish , and no virtuous character is foolish or senseless .
or , if we prefer , their accelerations depend only on the differences of their velocities and the differences of their coordinates , and not on the absolute values of these velocities and coordinates .
the great quantity of silver sent annually to the east indies reduces , he supposes , the quantities of those metals which remain in europe to the proportion of one to fourteen or fifteen , the proportion of their values .
first , my understanding of ' correct ' english is that for values less than 10 , you should use the corresponding words ( one , two , three , etc .
see also { for values of } .
convert back to ( a , b ) values and you are done .
in the tremendous issue it looked as though numbers and values had fallen apart , and as though the forces of barbarism , though they could never make , would now at last permanently destroy .
senior high school family , we commit ourselves to the universal values of love for god and service to humanity .
algorithms for calculating sine may be balanced for such constraints as speed , accuracy , portability , or range of input values accepted .
the danger which had been escaped , and which would not have been escaped had franklin had a less correct appreciation of relative values in the negotiation , at once became apparent .
later thousands have diminishing moral and spiritual values .
for other given values of _n_ the solution is more complicated .
employees are the most valuable asset companies possess and the one we expect the most from , but often the one that receives the short end of the stick when it comes to values applied to them .
all class organizations have their faults , but they teach their members group values and the dependence of the individual on his fellows .
an extensive set of values is developed for each aspect and together they form the underlying value system for the potentialist movement .
with respect to that , they are means , or instrumental values .
a compact self-adjoint operator t has only countably ( or finitely ) many spectral values .
they can be anticipated and dealt with in a manner that does not compromise other wikipedia values .
therefore , the juxtaposition of blue and yellow indicates the rational and disciplined people who always enhance their knowledge and imagination , especially in science and technology , without losing moral values .
economic values are expressed as " how much " of one desirable condition or commodity will , or would be given up in exchange for some other desired condition or commodity .
if proper synchronization techniques are not applied , it may cause a race condition where , the values of variables may be unpredictable and vary depending on the timings of context switches of the processes or threads .
at this station much lower values were found for a with sea breezes than with land breezes .
the project also needed to focus on the shifting cultural patterns of american youth , and determine precisely how their values intersected with the potential for their military enlistment .
the default ( type ) operator was added as well , in order to return values or initialize objects within a generic class .
men often create paper values , which disappear like snow before the summer sun when the operations of true economic principles attack them .
assume , for the sake of simplicity , that the values of all available investments are compounded daily .
each of these parenting styles reflects patterns of parental values , practices , and behaviors and a distinct balance of responsiveness and demandingness .
for men whose work lies in controlling and making values , rather than in making passive technical adjustments to existing values , the theory of value , as i have defined it , is of supreme importance .
the oberon programming language ( a descendant of pascal ) allows functions both as parameters and return values but the assigned function may not be a nested function .
`` lust '' is really a very ambiguous term ; it is a good word that has changed its moral values , and therefore we need to define it very carefully before we venture to use it .
208 , 209 ) , in the same county , to realise what very different artistic values two gates , based on one identical motif , may possess .
and on the other hand a _thorough_ discussion of means has been also largely neglected , owing to an obscure perception of the truth that it is perfectly irrelevant to the question of intrinsic values .
however , if you cannot think independently and must use the advice of some numeric values to find out which stocks to buy , you are not thinking like a businessman .
oclc not provided due to there being multiple valid values .
the primary facility for accessing the values of the elements of an array is the array subscript operator .
association of islamic charitable projects - an international organization with moderate islamic principles through values of moderation , openness , wisdom and cooperation .
= -- t -- 4 as a destiny number= shows that you are likely to make a large name for yourself , along the line of some practical invention , or the inauguration of a new system that saves labor , time or values to a great extent .
other values that play an important role in this context are the un global compact 's ten principles in the areas of human rights , labour , the environment and anti-corruption .
the foundation of a new economy is an equitable society that values everyone .
the truth seems to be that , by an imperceptible process , new values and hopes have been replacing the traditional ones , and that these values and aims both find themselves in harmony with the new knowledge and rest upon it .
reverend graham said that rick santorum was most closely aligned to christian values in his words and deeds and that senator santorum was certainly a christian at heart .
without doubt , it has modulated for many persons the transition from a supernatural to a spiritual religion ; it has enabled them to give up historical and miraculous elements as indifferent accretions and to retain the moral substance and emotional values of christianity .
in the humanistic model , there exist dynamical systems of values obtained from social actions in an evolutionary sense .
when an assignment is refreshed by the client computer , it initially requests the same parameter values , but may be assigned a new address from the server , based on the assignment policies set by administrators .
his realist aesthetic is indicative of his own left wing political beliefs , which starkly criticize western capitalism and the values of modern european society .
application of the laws of friction and lubrication in horology , 43 chapter v. the properties and relative values of lubricants in horology , 61 introduction .
these values are invisible to the unaided eye .
the following table gives some typical values .
fleming and dewar give for the susceptibility the values -13.7 × 10^ ( -6 ) at 15°c .
its topics include the motivation , attitudes , values and responses , adaptation , performance and health aspects of people engaged in physical activity and the relation of physical activity and lifestyle to health , prevention and aging .
in her column " the kingdom of the home " wrigley expressed the maternal feminist position that love and purity , the values of the home , should also become the guiding principles of politics .
a generalization to functions g taking values in any topological group is also possible .
the variety of application of hofstede 's abstract theory is so wide that it has even been translated in the field of web designing in which you have to adapt to national preferences according to cultures ' values .
derived from mmhg values using 0 .
much in bergson would point to the need for the addition of a philosophy of values .
from that hour he was another being ; his perception of values and his attitude toward life became readjusted .
christian women an opportunity to experience greek life without having to compromise their values .
the measure of values , and the law of use _hold everywhere_ , in every department of human life ; and the question , `` does it pay ? ''
the public , with that fine disregard in the theatre for the values it places on action outside , disapproved .
the difference between the oer- and ppp-denominated gdp values for most of the weathly industrialized countries are generally much smaller .
although kenny dalglish was not " educated " in the boot room , he realised the values that it brought and kept it during his tenure .
the shrinkage of the vital organs is like the shrinkage of capital and values .
these values are stipulated by the confidentiality , integrity and availability .
their influence on the group is reflected through the group 's core values of bringing enjoyment of taiko--to both drummers and the audience alike--and spreading japanese culture .
the limiting values varied from station to station , the size depending apparently on several considerations not very clearly defined .
the song depicts the values that youths should possess , encourages them to pursue their dreams , prove their value to the world , and wishes them success and happiness in their lives .
let these bank credits become unstable : let _social confidence_ be wiped out , and what happens to general prices and values ?
the benefit of introducing the riemann zeta function is that it can be defined for other values of s by analytic continuation .
the contributions of the award recipient should be generally consistent with the values and mission of the ctbuh and its founder , dr .
the different parametrizations of the light profile of bcg 's , as well as the faintness of the diffuse envelope lead to discrepancies in the reported values of the sizes of these objects .
camilla is one of the greatest beauties in the british nation , and yet values herself more upon being the virago of one party than upon being the toast of both .
the values are multiplied by the weighted values and the total tf is determined .
to give the young man the opportunity to develop his courage , his loyalty , his poise , the proper weighing of values and the proper control of his emotions in adversity , and in accomplishment .
however , it turns out that , even though affix values can only be manipulated with string concatenation , this formalism is turing complete ; hence , even the most basic questions about the language described by an arbitrary 2vw grammar are undecidable in general .
mark curry , these were replaced with the corresponding points values .
characters in odd positions have different values .
it changed all her values of life -- this knowledge of what the coming of a child costs ; she told alice that she was glad of the change .
he was the first chaplain to brief the joint chiefs of staff and worldwide unified combatant command commanders , at a washington , dc , cinc 's conference , where he addressed issues of core values and quality of life .
sometimes , no good solution to a dilemma in medical ethics exists , and , on occasion , the values of the medical community ( i .
even now , manufacturers of food products print on cartons and in advertising matter quality reasons for the superior food values of certain articles .
the dignity and divinity of personality does not exclude the significance of super-personalities ; indeed , the two , super personal presences with their moral obligations and concrete human persons with their rights and duties , co-operate with each other and produce thereby all the higher values of life .
owing to this , the values most in use may be exhausted .
regionalism refers to an intentional political process , typically led by governments with similar goals and values in pursuit of the overall development within a region .
a serious challenge arose in the late 1970s from fundamentalist sunni muslims , who reject the basic values of the secular ba 'ath program and object to rule by the alawis whom they consider heretical .
the soka gakkai has established multiple institutions and research facilities to promote its values of peace .
) , quantities whose values are given .
let us , like the fathers , keep close to the world of real values and refuse to be enticed into that `` paper world '' which is one of the real menaces of our country , far more so than the '' immigrant '' ever was .
an instrument working at f/5 or f/6 is extremely sensitive to focus and demands great precision of figure to fall within permissible values , say ¼λ to ½λ , for _dp_ .
of the imported values , 28 per cent .
but , in order to equalise the values , we must add a third more to the latter , which is at once decisive of the question .
but so much is clear : the good and the beautiful that may prevail under a thorough-going capitalism must be better and more beautiful than the values of old time .
the intonation structure assigns sets of ' auditory values ' ( pitches , degrees of loudness , phonation modes etc .
he was only dimly conscious of montgomery social values and the prominence of his uncle william 's wife had not seemed to him a matter of importance .
as such the proper development and preservation of mountainous areas and their values is of vital importance to our nation .
converted from mass values using molar mass of 360 .
in its name they obtained—half by force , half by persuasion—the adherence of a whole country , formerly among the greatest in the order of spiritual values , and have lowered it to the lowest level .
some scholars have claimed that the activism of youth during the vietnam war was symbolic of a youth culture whose values were against those of mainstream american culture .
fffffef ( sometimes more ; see below ) , whereas for atari gemdos only values up to 0x7fff are allowed on fat16 volumes .
you have said that it is not about changing the values from one system of measurement to another , but about altering the sequence in which they are presented .
hz operation , the ie2 and ie3 minimum full-load efficiency values are virtually identical to the north american national electrical manufacturers association ( nema ) energy efficient and premium efficiency motor standards , respectively .
a vertuous woman values fame too high , } to let such beastly slaves her walls come nigh , } and that 's the cause , he 's now her enemy : } when the white flag you see by them hung out .
following industrialization , advanced industrial society leads to a basic shift in values , de-emphasizing instrumental rationality .
to improve the execution time of the resulting code , one of the techniques of compiler optimization is register allocation , where the most frequently used values of the compiled program are kept in the fast processor registers .
1_s._ 6_d._ foreign measures and their english values .
( 2 ) present values should be determined by : ( _a_ ) cost of reproduction , ( _b_ ) mortality tables , ( _c_ ) data of performance , ( _d_ ) field examination .
when the first column ratio and teeth numbers fall between those given in the table , the tabular values are found by interpolating as seen in the following examples : examples of tabular values and setting numbers .
it does not create values .
in religion , traditional values become embodied in fixed rituals of music , processional , and prayer .
why should she mark so one of his values -- quite the wrong one -- when she would have nothing to do with another , which was quite the right ?
rothstein , a calculating gambler who values the power of accurate information , rebukes the group for not doing enough research on nucky 's butler , eddie , and for shooting an innocent civilian during the attack .
other values , including some surcharges , were issued later on from 1930 to 1940 , and they remained in use alongside the numerals until the 1950s .
the other greater and higher values can not be resolved into figures .
as a result , only a small number of the most expensive stamps , especially the dollar values , were sold .
he became personally acquainted with those who fought on the confederate side , from generals to privates , and he still values their friendship .
robbin ' the hood is a sublime album with noted low production values ( the album sleeve boasts of its " 13 self produced 4-track home recordings " ) , and also has multiple samples and lyrics from other artists featured in some tracks .
the simplest definition ensures that at least l distinct values for the sensitive field in each equivalence class .
it has looked upon life from one point of view only—namely , the moral—and has judged all action by ethical values alone , despising in this way philosophy , science , literature , poetry , painting and music .
several vignettes aired , featuring backlund preaching socially conservative values .
the masculine mind is readily taken in by specious values ; the average married man of protestant christendom , if he succumbs at all , succumbs to some meretricious and flamboyant creature , bent only upon fleecing him .
parametric mixture models are often used when we know the distribution y and we can sample from x , but we would like to determine the ai and θi values .
in the beginning ground values were not what they are to-day in paris .
nine of the properties are single temperature-independent values , mostly estimated by a simple sum of group contribution plus an addend .
nor does he consider such reasoning admissible ; he would , so to speak , trim his values according to his cloth , because to him such values are of no great value .
jewish and torah themes , including the soul and the afterlife , jewish views on marriage , torah values , current events , and much more .
`` no ; values have risen too enormously .
eugenius has what the world calls two hundred pounds a year ; but never values himself above nine-score , as not thinking he has a right to the tenth part , which he always appropriates to charitable uses .
in a simple eav design , the values of an attribute are simple or primitive data types as far as the database engine is concerned .
he was indifferent to material values and always wore shabby clothing .
the moment representation is introduced forms have an entirely new set of values .
that is , eisenstein series can be ' designed ' to take on given values at cusps .
for , according to him , the creation of new values , new principles , new standards , is the philosopher 's sole _raison d'être_ ; and this he certainly accomplished .
if you want to understand in the long run , it is carrying the cross that will teach you the real values .
saunier duval 's sportif director , mauro gianetti , suggested he spend a week in the uci laboratory in lausanne to prove that his blood values were natural .
in digital electronic circuits , electric signals take on discrete values , to represent logical and numeric values .
originally founded to help fundraising for a catholic counterrevolution against communism , it subsequently becoming a civil cultural organization that aims to uphold and promote the values of christian civilization .
when land is described by the formula '_x_ carucatae et _z_ acrae , ' what values are assigned to _z_ ?
this former i call a survey or inquisition into the intrinsick values of land , this latter of extrinsick or accidentall follows .
for [ cl^ { − } ] = 1 , ε is +1.694 ( see the table at the end of chapter xv ) , and inserting these values in our equation and solving it for [ c ] , we find [ c ] = 2.88e29 .
raised phosphate values were put down to intensive arable farming near the source of the river .
the threat of its construction , which would demolish much of the neighborhood , was enough to reduce property values and add to the neighborhood 's blight .
there are certain invariants associated with the stress tensor , whose values do not depend upon the coordinate system chosen , or the area element upon which the stress tensor operates .
lee kuan yew thus saw the birth of the national courtesy campaign , which became a recurrent , annual campaign that was seen as a long-term project of aiming to imbue values of courtesy into singaporeans within a period of 10 years .
solid snake was physically aged to portray to the player the games 's overarching theme , " sense " , and to assign them to a character whose task was to pass moral values to future generations .
to quote quinney , he `` created '' values .
both argue that the earlier blood theory of kinship derived from an unwarranted extension of symbols and values from anthropologists ' own cultures ( see ethnocentrism ) .
finding well-centered stamps with wide margins in any denomination in this early issue is a challenge for the collector and well centered examples command prices that far exceed average catalog values .
thus , a complete inversion of values has here taken place .
his first book , the quest for power ( 1963 ) , was a study in the transfer of political and constitutional traditions , values , institutions , and practices from england to america .
harvey considered it a masterpiece , others such as michael dooley felt little annie fanny was " known more for its lavish production values than its humor " , or that it compromised kurtzman 's genius .
were the sounds estimated by some physical means , instead of by the ear , the values of the sounds at the distances recorded would not , in my opinion , show a greater advance with the increase of material than that indicated by the foregoing numbers .
below the “ 2½ pence , ” and the surcharges are so printed on the sheet that these black bars fall more or less exactly on the lower labels of the stamps , and obliterate the original values .
a named parameter ( remove observability ) specifying multiple special values .
opinions have naturally differed concerning von ditfurth 's appraisal of the comparative values of rheims cathedral and the tombstone of a german grenadier , but even the champions of military necessity were glad to learn later that the cathedral still stood , though much damaged .
`` 'cultural and social values of education , ' he called that , did n't he ?
various commentaries on journalism education are related to criticisms of contemporary news media standards and values .
remember all tonics are bitter , therefore beware of any so-called tonics that the animals eat readily as these possess no real tonic values .
chart showing the changes in the relative values of gold and silver from 1501 to 1880 .
p-u-r-a is research , experimentation , creativity , ideas and inquiry on ecological , economic and ethical values .
in this case artistic and commercial values go together .
occasionally the situation is further complicated by the insistence of dietetic experts that the immigrant mother can not feed her family intelligently unless she has some knowledge of food values .
lastly , symptomatic meaning is derived from particular social ideologies and values .
analysis of the 5 regular polyhedra gives a step-by-step derivation of these exact values .
cooper writes that " the aspirant neither renounces life in the world nor is caught up in the realm of the senses " essentially reiterating the yin and yang values of balance that daoism and chinese alchemy were originally derived from .
one can selectively display statistical values on the globe surface or in a tabular form , different sized cities , various geological or man-made features and reference lines in a map .
despite hope 's heroic values , her son adam is considered a monster .
pass values through to the options table .
kelly of dayton , ohio , the idea to include a weekly " trends " column reflecting the changes in coin values was formed .
the content of the original video is important as it benchmarks cultural values , which is critically important to know what the reaction video means .
continuing to apply analog values and definitions of standards to the digital environment , battin said , will effectively lead to forfeiture of the benefits of digital technology to research and scholarship .
here again , however , the values are quite unreliable , and , as in the case of lowndes ' , there is no index of subjects whatever .
the persecution of the jews is not the only proof - but the most horrible of all - of a denial of these values of life .
seasonal variation and mean values are shown in table 15 .
in the case of taste and the other senses the values are unknown or difficult to determine , but it is clear that the æsthetic values of the different senses do not depend merely on their various psychophysical constants .
yet they have access to books and they turn from them with a clear sense of intelligent preference for other human values .
he may be a complete failure , on account of his instability ; or a conspicuous success , if he converts his experiences into social values -- puts them in the form of a poem , makes of them a contribution to science , etc .
an infographic conceptual representation of the ultimatum game in matrix form with pie-graphed payoff values ( offers and norms shown including payoffs to both players ) .
alan bloom's position , embraced by many intellectuals , is rooted in the belief that people can not be effective unless they build on the foundation of historically confirmed values , in particular the great books .
we must be quite clear about relative values .
the values are decimal , not hexadecimal , though .
according to the carnegie endowment for international peace , al-wasat " seeks to interpret islamic sharia principles in a manner consistent with the values of a liberal democratic system .
actigraphs have a number of different ways of accumulating the values from the accelerometer in memory .
utilizing the values for the precipitin tests a model was constructed which showed the relationships of the eleven species used in these tests .
he is a hoity-toity yet conservative man worried about values and aesthetics in present society .
i have always had a very high opinion of the intellectual values of the leading divines of both the anglican and catholic communions .
i do not plan on placing my own ethical values above wikipedia process by impose them when making administrative actions .
i believe each daughter fails to realize in her own case how much her mother values signs of the love which both know to be there .
let it be enough to say that it is the raising to the _n_th power of the spirit of struggling and aggressive efficiency , and the venting of an over-full vitality by the creation of new values out of the wealth of the individual ego .
the values combined are called operands , arguments , or inputs , and the value produced is called the value , result , or output .
organizations can manage organizational identification by managing how individuals form personal values and identities , and how those values cause them to approach relationships inside and outside of work ( pratt 2000 ) .
_money is the public credit_ , stamped or imprinted upon , or represented by , metal , paper , or any other convenient substance recognized by law or usage , and employed as a medium of exchange and a measure of values .
in other sections of the city , where there are no negroes , depreciation of property values has been produced by contacts between populations differing in race , religion , or social standards .
the point of view changes values so .
for values of _n_ between 0.010 and 0.020 .
at the beginning they did not have enough money to make all the necessary legal arrangements so they began the company with just a hand shake and based their business relations with the values that each of them learned at home .
for example , this allows us to define f ( zp ) with values in the p-adic numbers .
as i have stated elsewhere ( _man and dolphin_ ) , it is my impression that there exist critical threshold values in the brain ’ s growth pattern at which certain kinds of performance become possible .
the answer to his question was that to do a syscall you have to load up values into eax and ebx and trigger an interrupt to trap into the kernel .
africentric cultural values , psychological help-seeking attitudes , and self-concealment in african american college students .
it is the most formidable inspirer of doubts , and depredator of values , concerning the _world which we are_ : it was our most dangerous_ attempt_ heretofore on the life of life .
man values most what is hardest to get .
in brunei , malaysia and vietnam , on the other hand , measured values must only be reported to the government .
second , bacon notices the reversal of values or evaluations which puts the existence at risk .
personally , i find it very interesting that a musical genre that , seemingly at least , so strongly rejects islamic and christian values is gaining popularity in much of the islamic world .
peikoff presented his objections to kelley in an article called " fact and value , " arguing that kelley 's case itself contradicted rand 's understanding of the relationship between cognition and evaluation , facts and moral values .
crushed stone has one of the lowest average by weight values of all mineral commodities .
thus the physician may work with the ideas of religious belief , but those ideas are then no longer religious values but natural psychophysical material , which is to be applied whenever it appears as the right means to secure a certain effect .
the specific gravities of acids and alkalis in solution are made use of in works , etc. , as a means of ascertaining their strengths and commercial values .
her house furnishing , with its pitiful little decorations , her scanty supply of books , are never seen by the people whose social opinions she most values .
ncca serve as a leading national and regional resource model for incorporating the performing arts in all levels of education to promote humanitarian values ; cross cultural understanding ; enhance cultural enrichment and bring about social change .
it may perhaps seem incongruous to say that purgatory took over the values of the millennium and from the point of view of formal theology it is so .
substituting these values in the above equation , we get v_ { s } = ( 500 × 740 ) / ( 760 ( 1 + 0.00366 × 20 ) ) = 453.6 cc .
teaching social and emotional learning in schools aims to enhance children 's understanding of themselves and those experiencing mental hardship and to encourage comfort in a school setting that values the development of knowledge , interpersonal skills and well-being in students .
the radii of these two circular fragments , r1 and r2 , are called the principal radii of curvature , and their inverse values are referred to as the two principal curvatures .
fischer did important work defining the nested relational model of databases , in which the values in the cells of a relational database may themselves be relations , .
the values given in the table have been plotted , and the effect of the height of hills on the azimuth is shown .
in fact , they were the most quadrupedal of the sloth lemurs , having an intermembral index between 97 and 113 , compared to the lower value for indriids and higher values for the other sloth lemurs .
for some years up to the outbreak of the war which has knocked all so-called modern values silly , my young friends , with a certain respectful superciliousness , regarded me as an amiable person hopelessly out of date .
laura ashley stuck to its traditional values and it remained unclear whether laura ashley was a manufacturer , retailer or brand .
the card deck consists of cards with face values ranging from 4 to 12 , each with different combinations of four different suits -- balls , cubes , cones and stars .
wikipedia only has 5 core values , and one of them is be bold .
specific values are chosen to make the calculation easier .
because i was civil , here ’ s a stir with a pox : who is it that values your —— or your fox ?
the algebra of life is too much for the brain which is accustomed to deal only with definite values .
`` let him have the worthless gift if he values it , '' thought archdale , feeling that the gun had better have been turned the other way in his hands .
`` if he values his life he 'd better not do that ! ''
might not the values of things have altered a little for them ?
i needed this hyperbola to apply to my generating function so that it , too , is bounded on the zero side but its positive values are essentially unchanged .
in some cases , such as meroitic , the sound values of the glyphs are known , but the texts still cannot be read because the language is not understood .
social system 67 traditional social patterns and values -- social stratifications under communist rule -- education -- religion 6 .
yes , the university is the bearer of prejudices as well as values .
sprites can be rotated and scaled and take account of blending and tinting values .
yet humanity is regarded as noble and worthy of respect ; it is made the value of all values ; the object of our faith and our hope ; all our efforts are directed towards its well-being .
although the majority of the pupils are hindu by religion , the school attempts to impart christian values to the children .
it is impossible , therefore , to doubt from the steady way in which the observed values overtop the randoms , that there is a greater average likeness in the finger marks of two brothers , than in those of two persons taken at hazard .
kaye was awarded the colonel james tod international award by the maharana mewar foundation of udaipur , rajasthan , for her " contribution of permanent value reflecting the spirit and values of mewar " .
however , gold values in bleg are lower than total assays such as those of fire assays , as it analyzes only the fine grained gold fraction and largely ignores coarser and nuggety gold .
but these , too , act on the economic situation through affecting the quantities of objects of value , and so through modification of the marginal values of goods .
the scr and pcr are time stamps encoding the timing of the bit stream itself , and are derived from the same time base used for the audio and video pts values from the same program .
_the multiformity_ of the world as a question of _strength , _ which sees all things in the _perspective of their growth._ the moral christian values to be regarded as the insurrection and mendacity of slaves ( in comparison with the aristocratic values of the _ancient world ) .
this childhood , as any childhood , can be characterized as devoid of any real understanding of values , as is that of a child who uses a priceless chronometer to crack nuts .
because pcbs are almost invariably found in complex mixtures , the concept of toxic equivalency factors ( tefs ) has been developed to facilitate risk assessment and regulatory control , where more toxic pcb congeners are assigned higher tef values on a scale from 0 to 1 .
the number of unfaithful wives whose sin becomes the public shame is simply appalling ; yet no criminal was ever so cautious , so adept in the art of concealment as the woman who values her reputation above her honor .
the values held are love , peace , non-violence , environmentalism , non-consumerism and non-commercialism , volunteerism , respect for others , consensus process , and multicultural diversity .
doubtless most police forces will espouse professional values , which would tend to preclude the use of sarcasm .
if he can not rely on definite values of property , his compass is amiss ; he is adrift upon bitter waters without a helm .
he had staked his own fortunes upon its invincible prosperity by investing in real estate , and within a few years he had reaped the reward of his faith in unseen values .
its main objective were to look after the welfare of the lushai students , to prepare them to be the leader in future , and to preserve the lushai traditional and cultural values .
the last column of table 14 permits interpolation for intermediate chlorine values .
christ may never tell you how greatly he loves and values you ; but while you lie there in your prison , with sad and overcast heart , he is saying and thinking great things about you yonder .
enumerated types can also prevent a programmer from writing illogical code such as performing mathematical operations on the values of the enumerators .
gxmx2 ) to give a charged weak angle values of .
both gasolene and gasoline are used in the text both carburator and carburetor are used in the text many of the table values have errors which can be shown by graphing the results , these have been left as printed but are noted here : p.5 .
time is then our final tribunal , the only adjuster of musical values who makes no errors in judgment .
inhuman values .
other research has shown increasing specific leaf area values in plants under water limitation .
after a preceding forward sweep where all intermediate values in the computational graph are calculated , the algorithm initiates a reverse sweep of the graph .
so grand a scheme of colour that by its side the essays of the most daring painter might well seem feeble , so exquisite a poem that the intrusion of the photographer , analysing the values and tones and calculating his powers of reproduction seemed like sacrilege .
the operating system kept copies of the values written in " shadow registers " in pages 0 and 2 of memory ( page 1 was the hardware stack on 6502 processors ) , thus allowing programs to read the values .
the value of dairy produce is materially influenced by nearness to markets and also by the average production per farm , and these factors assisted in modifying the rank of loudoun with reference to farm values of dairy produce .
the crumbling of values , power corruption and greed , and the circles of influence are commonplace in his novels .
nelson attributes this at least partially to the values shared between the lds church and nazi 's , such as an " interest in genealogy , sports and large families " and to mormon willingness to serve in wehrmacht and the hitler youth .
the park supports the needs of the nearby communities through its forest products , watershed and recreational values .
up to the present there are no extensive series of life-expectancy tables in which hundreds of thousands of cases are analyzed from the diastolic pressure values .
the transformation of practical values into aesthetic has often been noted , and has even led to the theory that beauty is utility seen at arm 's length ; a premonition of pleasure and prosperity , much as smell is a premonition of taste .
destiny church has campaigned for a return to what it considers to be " christian moral values " in new zealand society , particularly for the " sanctity of marriage between a husband and wife " .
substituting values , in the above instance , we have : answer : sq .
among the themes common to works published in the balai pustaka period are arranged marriage , conflict between the younger and older generations , and conflict between western culture and traditional values .
its economic education should be more important than the immediate production of values , and it might be right that one generation should sacrifice its gain and enjoyment to secure the strength and skill of the future .
both take one argument that specifies the formatting of the output , and any number of arguments that provide the values to be formatted .
all norms and values need to be considered and respected , which often leads to an unstable equilibrium where divergent worldviews can be brought together .
prioritize the key values at stake .
i have already written about you to mr. kewe , the great nurseryman , and if he values my opinion at all and consults his own interest , by the end of the week there will be a letter from him to engage you . ''
it only takes note of the ways and degrees of dependence upon mundane resources and conditions that values of every order must acknowledge .
cultural neuroscience cultural neuroscience is the study of how cultural values , practices and beliefs shape and are shaped by the mind , brain and genes across multiple timescales .
but when it comes to sexuality , suddenly many psychologists , sociologists , and ethologists find themselves entirely failing to maintain those proper standards any longer for no other reasons than ethnocentric values .
dm 70 million ( in 1952 values ) had been completed at the end of the war .
he despatched to her a set of his novels , for which , she said , she was `` most grateful , and which she values much . ''
in the life of the child this emotional response precedes the intellectual judgment of artistic values which comes later and only through contrast and comparison , and the former is vastly more important in social significance for the pleasure of the mass than the latter .
hence , inserting these values , 0 + p_a/g + h1 - h1 = v²/2g + p_a/g - h ; v²/2g = h ; ( 2 ) or v = [ root ] ( 2gh ) = 8.025v [ root ] h. ( 2a ) [ illustration : fig .
the political loyalty lies in values and principals like ; democracy , rule of law and rights and freedoms .
he most deeply values your loyalty , your devotion and your services .
the varying burst frequency offset ( bfo ) values indicate the aircraft was moving at speed .
stone broke with his presbyterian background to form the new sect that rejected calvinism , required weekly communion and the baptism of adults , accepted the bible as the source of truth , and sought to restore the values of primitive christianity .
he was filled with hatred and contempt for the materialistic and democratic values of the swiss people , and he denounced them as a racial miscarriage , " a mishegotten branch of our volk .
experience and many previous failures , and a sort of sixth sense , acquired perhaps in work on a local paper , render quick and almost subconscious judgments on news values more accurate than the uninitiated might imagine .
performances are cranked up to red-line neurotic levels , while production values intently contribute to creating an artificially bleak world where it 's understandable scarcely anyone would want to spend time , even for the duration of this movie .
because of this decision he becomes ambivalent towards football and what it stands for beginning the inner battle between homeric and christian values .
the size , mintage , and face values are listed to illustrate the numerous changing standards in the first lunar series .
outside of the peruvian deposit , the affiliations of which are doubtful , the vanadium deposits of economic importance owe their positions and values mainly to the action of surface processes , rather than to igneous activity .
these can be divided to the explicit part ( such as values stored in variables ) and the implicit part ( return addresses and the instruction pointer ) .
current events , festivals and parties continue to promote the hippie lifestyle and values .
a similar notation remains in common use as an underbar to superscript digits , especially for monetary values without a decimal mark , e .
this , i suppose , is what the french mean by laying so much stress upon `` values . ''
sensitivity and specificity are prevalence-independent test characteristics , as their values are intrinsic to the test and do not depend on the disease prevalence in the population of interest .
with such solitariness and frigidities , you may judge i was glad to see clough here , with whom i had established some kind of robust working-friendship , and who had some great permanent values for me .
_give the values of t as a numeral._ 300 in the greek notation ; in the latin , 160 .
and ought i not to bestow her on one who values her at so great price ? ” these words put the grand vizier into a strange agitation .
he stuck to his quaker values during the war by becoming a photographer for the civil defence forces instead of a soldier .
she wondered if forrest , who so well understood the dangers as well as the values of timber , had ever devised a scheme , some practical , inexpensive method within the reach of ranchers , for its protection .
the stated purpose for doing so is to create a mass media system that informs and empowers all members of society , and enhances democratic values .
unused imperforate copies exist of all values in the following shades -- imperforate ½d .
that section of the press which supports lawless property has attacked him because he has disturbed `` values '' and `` vested interests . ''
but the law of which we speak , comprehending the values of freedom , affirms the equality of all nations , great and small .
religious systems rely on media for inculcation and reinforcement of religious values , transmitting religious messages to the masses , and successfully competing with other religious or nonreligious philosophies .
possibly they lived in the lagoon at times of scant rainfall and little runoff , when the salinity of lagoon water approached normal marine values or the fishes may have lived in the streams , and after death were washed into the lagoon .
tests the template with different values for the size parameter .
it was little enough to ask for -- a return to old values , old relationships , the normalcies of the backwash instead of the freneticisms of the lime-light .
table of food values .
during the cold war , revel was known as a champion of classical liberal values such as liberty and democracy at a time when many preeminent european intellectuals praised communism or maoism .
one who estimates or values ; a valuer .
in 2007 sam and annaka harris founded project reason , a charitable foundation devoted to spreading scientific knowledge and secular values in society .
the standard can be implemented to transmit either 8-bit values ( the standard in consumer electronics ) or 10-bit values ( sometimes used in studio environments ) .
it is revealed that at some point murdock began training tim to be his successor , teaching him how to fight as well as instilling in him the values he learned from various figures over the years .
verily , an appropriator of all values must such bestowing love become ; but healthy and holy , call i this selfishness .
i am well aware that our high-minded king too little values the title and parade , which he is aware is all the present parliament will ever grant him , to wound his own conscience , or lay snares for that of others .
show the annual variation in sabine 's disturbances , the monthly values being expressed as percentages of the arithmetic mean value for the 12 months .
you get the most immediate effect of reality by the _relief_ ; the relief you get most directly by putting in first those values which contrast with what is already there .
this distribution is bimodal for certain values of is parameters .
a market-based exchange rate will change whenever the values of either of the two component currencies change .
since we still have 9000 evaluations of f left available , we repeat the process 9 more times to get highly accurate values of the roots of f .
toynbee school 's curriculum is " broad and balanced " according to the school so as to provide the framework for pupils to have the " skills , knowledge , attitudes and values which will help them play a full and useful role in all aspects of adult society .
for the purpose of thus simplifying the operations of arithmetic , the base is taken to be 10 , and use is made of tables of logarithms in which the values of x , the logarithm , corresponding to values of m , the number , are tabulated .
while the cip recognizes the correct radii for both the r1 and r2 values , they treat the transition from the body to shoulder and neck to shoulder as filet radii .
at what day or hour of a child 's life does the consciousness of human values in affairs first impinge upon the embryonic mentality ?
it is a transmission of cultural and moral values embedded within a story passed on from elders to children as a learning experience .
because of its easiness of modelling , falling-film column is in generally used as laboratory equipment , for example the measures experimentally the values of transport coefficients .
the june 7 , 1839 document , sometimes called a constitution , but more similar to a declaration of rights simply stated the government was based on christian values and equality for all .
life took on new values .
the values of the weights are empirical , but can be rationalized in terms of bent 's rule .
in the contrast the audience makes between the seriousness of the characters in what they do and say and the attitude the dramatist creates toward them lie the real comic values .
in his address at the opening of the un general assembly in october 1991 president kabua called for " a new and comprehensive vision of a global society , supported by a new system of values .
the process of determining values for all configurations is done by taking a large database of games played between strong players and calculating statistics for each configuration in each game stage from all the games .
russell kirk , david and rush limbaugh , ann coulter , phyllis schlafly , william bennett , gertrude himmelfarb and irving and william kristol , arguing that , despite the efforts of right-wing polemicists , the values of the american people have become steadily more liberal over time .
meanwhile , land values are on the increase , and the quarter sections that sold from $ 500 to $ 800 each , fifty years ago , are now bringing $ 16,000 to $ 24,000 each .
for the multinomial distribution , and for the vector form of the categorical distribution , the expected values of the elements of the vector can be related to the predicted probabilities similarly to the binomial and bernoulli distributions .
to keep his whole story and the comparative values of certain sequences straight in his mind , is no easy matter .
it is composed of 25 icons woven together to create a u shape , with each icon representing one of the company 's sub-brands or its corporate values .
however , as with methane , their abundances are probably greater than solar values by a factor of at least 20 to 30 , and possibly by a factor of a few hundred .
violating rule 2 produces accurate r2 and f values , indicating that we would reach the same conclusions about whether or not there is a significant difference ; however , we can no longer interpret the b values as a mean difference .
if a severe decline in real-estate values takes place , affecting all localities , it might become necessary for the holders of guaranteed mortgages to test the value of their guaranties .
_when two liquid phases are formed , therefore , the concentrations and the vapour pressure have definite values , which are maintained so long as the two liquid phases are present_ ; the temperature being supposed constant .
the move followed an islamist coup d 'état in sudan , led by colonel omar al-bashir , who professed a commitment to reordering muslim political values .
pln represents truth values as intervals , but with different semantics than in imprecise probability theory .
average values exist for both men and women .
ccbc workers and volunteers regularly conduct values education classes with the students of the school , often gathering students in the same class sections to common groups to foster openness and sharing in discussions .
words like weigh , whey , & c. , having no figure values , are never counted .
take , for example , the notorious naturalistic doctrine of art for art 's sake , the defiant divorcing of ethical and aesthetic values .
falsely low or high values have been obtained depending on the particular test or laboratory used .
it is selective for cb2 , with ki values of 0 .
a greater range of values existed for the argument of perihelion and longitude of the ascending node .
for statistical hypothesis testing , moran 's i values can be transformed to z-scores in which values greater than 1 .
she values the post of confidante so highly that she will endure a man 's most uninteresting confidences with joy , because of the real compliment implied by their bestowal .
) , opposed measures intended to restore values ( _valuta_ ) , on the ground that they were anti-national .
many spectroscopic experiments later , they estimated the values for two of racah 's parameters , b and c , for each d-electron configuration based on the trends in the absorption spectra of isoelectronic first-row transition metals .
aesthetic values are reversed .
they therefore are actually spreading pre-islamic pagan values .
thus non-maximum suppression can help to suppress all the gradient values to 0 except the local maximal , which indicates location with the sharpest change of intensity value .
( j. j. t. ) footnotes : [ 1 ] the values for nickel and bismuth given in the table are much higher than later values obtained with pure electrolytic nickel and bismuth .
the displayed values start at this value , and use the interval set using ( eg ) xaxisvaluestep .
to go on would be a conflict in my values .
only significances , values , are relevant here .
as a part of the modern farmer organization movement , and holding within itself the largest promise of social values , is the encouragement of cooperation .
to enable this country to join the confederation , it would be needful for the values to be equalized .
in custer county , colorado , the ore body of the bassick mine is a conglomerate of rounded boulders of all sizes cemented together , somewhat like concrete , by the materials which really carry the values .
“ if we regard products with reference to their exchangeable value , or simply with reference to their value , we have to do with [ p185 ] a species of wealth which procures values to society , and which i call ‹the wealth of value› .
ft. per hour for the same difference of temperature , values which are many times greater than those actually obtained in ordinary surface condensers .
it is inappropriate to set parameters to false values in order that the template will be rendered to the reader as if it were written in some style other than the style normally produced by the template ( e .
can you suggest other items under each group of values ?
card values are tracked from actual sales on the ebay trading floor , giving each collector an up-to-the-minute portfolio value .
labor in use deals with figures and values that are quite as large .
these extrinsic values usually bulk much larger in the end than the first transitory intrinsic value ; but our natural tendency is to forget them and guide our action by immediate values .
using only the simple correlation function for a reassignment of pixel values , would ascribe to the independency of fluctuations of the emitters in time in a way that no cross-correlation terms would contribute to the new pixel value .
the program on cyber security studies ( pcss ) focuses on ways to address the many challenges in the cyber environment while adhering to the fundamental values of democratic society .
the savagery of war brings the two sexes back to primitive values .
even such operations as the weighing and measurement of goods will all be done by automatic machinery , [ 4 ] capable of recording without any possibility of error the quantity and values of goods submitted to its operation .
indeed , it takes the value -1 for negative values of x close to zero , and it is valued 1 for positive values of x near the origin .
if this was the emperor's object , possibly the value of the denarius is set somewhat too high , but it probably does not materially exceed its exchange value , and in any case , the relative values of articles given in the tables are not affected .
on the other hand , wikipedia also values these principles in the texts of our articles - yet in other of our activities we abandon them on the altar of user convenience .
at that time a gold ducat was worth , in contemporary values , about one half of a pound sterling , or about two us dollars .
the names of the pieces combine their promoted and unpromoted values , and are puns in japanese for words with the same pronunciations but different kanji .
furs not trapped during the animal ’ s winter prime were nearly worthless , and values depended on their condition generally .
_interpolation._ -- in most cases the quantity in the second column may be regarded as increasing or decreasing continuously as the number in the first column increases , and it has intermediate values corresponding to intermediate ( i.e .
these standard symbols and their values are called mathematical constants .
but it depends upon the people whose favor the young man values .
sampling rates consistent with a standard mechanical ergometer test show significantly lower peak and average power values than a test which has computer data feeds with much higher sampling rates .
let our colleges first adopt whatever measures may be necessary to make athletics yield their educational values to all students and teachers .
when a circuit is connected to an alternator there are an indefinite number of values for capacity and self-induction which , in conjunction , will satisfy the condition of resonance .
the entire issue drops out of sight with the 1901 report , but the 1905 report suddenly presents the figures given for the three high values still on hand , and records 30 of the 5 dollar stamps turned in for destruction .
the classes are given a specific color or shading based on their values and what they are trying to portray .
the returns for the year 1891 show that the imports and exports of valletta are almost exactly the same in the aggregate values , each considerably exceeding twenty-two million pounds sterling .
inaccurate values should not be erased or discarded .
be adopted , which is probably the upper limit of the average proportion between land values and real estate values throughout the country , the portion of the general property tax now paid by land amounts to about fifty-two per cent .
aukštaitians and samogitians respectively ) as they depict worldview , values , and culture of everyday samogitian peasants .
for example , developers use simple databases ( such as a file containing a list of important values ) all the time as tools .
fisher presents dooley as naive and unaware that he was being indoctrinated with catholic values , and this aspect of his personality remains static throughout his college life .
c-reactive protein ( crp ) 5 , 62730 serum c-reactive protein values in diabetics with periodontal disease a .
in practice , vibe does not estimate the pdf , but uses a set of previously observed sample values as a pixel model .
he had not known how he held himself -- how he cherished those values , so familiar that he had forgotten to be thankful till their possession was a retrospection .
we can study values of color as well as of black and white .
annadurai would attack superstitions and religious exploitation but would never fight against the spiritual values of society .
it is argued that the teaching of evolution degrades values , undermines morals , and fosters irreligion or atheism .
modern corporations are said to practice mind control to create a work force which shares the same common values and culture .
values at play in collaboration with researchers at nyu , tiltfactor studies the ways in which games communicate social , political , and moral values .
the population of newport decreased , businesses closed , and property values plummeted .
the narrator talks about traditional family values and the old-fashioned sweetness of spending slow summer hours on the front steps .
to or from this valuation , especially if made to determine proper capital , there must be added or subtracted certain values for intangible property , often found by a study of the income account of the corporation .
when a pair of values are less similar , the spatial autocorrelation is said to be negative .
for a given e , such as pi , that means there are infinitely many speeds d for which the discs coincide eventually , within any possible range of values for d .
similar to warhammer fantasy , the game uses a " points-system " to assign values to each miniature , allowing players to ensure that their armies are evenly matched .
certain values give the societies and people that hold them a better chance of reproducing and these behaviors are passed on , not through genetics and evolution , but by those people teaching their children .
if keats is highly imaginative and poetic without on the whole rising to high seriousness or sinking to sophistry , shelley , on the other hand , illustrates in his imaginative activity the confusion of values that was so fostered by romanticism .
paul college , pasig paulinian is an integrated woman who is endowed with the knowledge , skills , and attitude that make her a lifelong learner , a firm upholder of christian values , and a conscientious mover in the filipino society .
the best values of the parameters for a given problem are usually determined from some training data ( e .
recently , due to the spread of the upscale businesses and residences of center city toward western south street , property values have risen , and there has been further displacement of lower income , mostly minority , inhabitants .
this can be referred to a " constant sheaf " , meaning exactly " sheaf of locally constant functions " taking their values in the ( same ) group .
in its descriptive sense , " morality " refers to personal or cultural values , codes of conduct or social mores .
national security values there is no longer doubt that space exploration holds genuine significance for the security and well-being of the united states as a nation .
this document shows a specific relation between cineon code values and status-m densities .
with the change in standpoint from self-included existence to including process , from structural unit of composition to controlling unity of function , from changeless form to movement in growth , the whole scheme of values is transformed .
it is important to me that my business affairs are in line with my personal values .
popular front organized series of much-crowded and well-published events and actions which stressed on estonian national pride but on democratic values as well .
they also found that ministerial decisions in this case should follow values that are in international human rights law .
these values are not likely to be much affected by differing school conditions .
but there are many who would consider this result as fantastic , if not frivolous , and not to be classed among the educational values connected with the introduction of stories into the school curriculum .
see also for values of .
purposes and the translation of values into action .
the organization defines peace by the consensus values of safety , prosperity , and quality of life .
from the secret council-chamber of his own consciousness , into which no other may enter , it draws all its values .
for example , drawing a graph will overwrite the x and y values .
in his dissertation on slavery , he showed how goods with a purely utilitarian value are ' translated ' into ritual and ceremonial values which then form the basis of power in several preliterate societies .
unit conversions are factual values which are entirely encyclopedic .
of course the student must know his pigments , how to obtain hues and values by mixing , how to use brushes , how to sketch in , and all the elementary details , —but this is but a beginning .
samuel richardson wrote some of the first novels , such as `` clarissa '' ; he wrote on values such as religious faith , moral virtue , and family closeness .
for instance , the small strip of allowed values along the lower-left edge of the plot are a continuation of the large , extended-chain region at upper left .
it furthermore requires a direct current power source , a resistance box to regulate the current density and a multimeter to read the current values .
the prize values on the original series were deliberately much smaller than those of barry and enright 's other games , especially the big-money games ( not just their own ) implicated as part of the 1950s quiz show scandals .
parkinson , who had been having an improving conversation with the hall porter on the subject of land values , approached .
negative values in the second term 221 § 57 .
social pedagogy is based on humanistic values stressing human dignity , mutual respect , trust , unconditional appreciation , and equality , to mention but a few .
during gameplay , players collect lego pieces with different point values .
on the whole , the disciplinary value of the history of education is attained as an incident of its cultural and practical values .
choosing , therefore , the best k values is not trivial .
the second equation assumes any integer value for n ( even negative values ) .
oseen substituted the following flow velocity values into the navier-stokes equations .
therefore the atomic mirrors usially work at small values of the grazing angle .
1 , and inasmuch as the same sign occurred in various names , it was , furthermore , possible to assign , at least tentatively , certain values to the signs in question .
when all values have been tried , the algorithm backtracks .
imported goods , for instance , bring with them the invoice of the seller giving the values at the place of exportation .
if the constructor does have one or more parameters , but they all have default values , then it is still a default constructor .
its specific issues include states ' rights , race relations ( especially interracial marriage , which it opposes ) , and conservative christian values .
three years later , in 1921 , the 1911 issue was given the same treatment , and the twelve stamps from that issue were overprinted with their new values in escudos and centavos .
speakers of mountain-jew dialect and tati language are representatives of two different nations , each with its own religion , ethnic consciousness , self-designation , way of life , material and spiritual values .
every exchange presupposes that values and interest have assumed an objective character .
the fixed rate offered in the swap is the rate which values the fixed rates payments at the same pv as the variable rate payments using today 's forward rates , i .
here , then , is the opposition : between the philosophy that borrows its values from science and the philosophy which shares its values with art .
in order to arrive at greater definiteness , it may be well to assign definite rainfall values to the ordinarily used descriptive terms of the region in question .
human values are as jealous as the yahweh of moses .
he was the fourth of five brothers ; their father imbued in them the values of commitment , loyalty , integrity and self-reliance .
generally , internalization is the process of consolidating and embedding one 's own beliefs , attitudes , and values when it comes to moral behavior .
considering discussing the influences and " gandhian values " that inspired all this , and prolly on how govt .
traditional values may be inapplicable ; it is hard to discriminate novelty from originality .
for example , some argue that values act as a center of gravity for prices .
this was similar to a modified hash table data structure that allowed multiple values ( parameters ) for each key ( name ) .
the distinctions of moral values have either originated in a ruling caste , pleasantly conscious of being different from the ruled -- or among the ruled class , the slaves and dependents of all sorts .
nevertheless , negotiating them must also be placed in the category of '' practical '' values -- for in the long run it seems to be an essential part of the maturing of mankind .
in the last dozen years , published values of 20th century gsl rise have ranged from 1 .
deaf community as a language minority , do not embrace deaf values , history , language , mores , and sense of personal dignity as deaf people do themselves .
area and farming tabulations population industries farm values live stock values animals sold and slaughtered neat cattle dairy products steers horses , mules , etc .
in other words , they must be melted in the contents and values of the over-individual ideals ; they must be sanctified to subserve the higher , absolute ends and demands of the spirit .
new europeans campaigns for the promotion of european values , the protection of european 's rights , and fixing the information asymmetry that exists with regards to the european union .
it also creates an opportunity to grapple with the most difficult challenge which the most highly-valued administrators face with grace and tact -- expressing themselves persuasively about core values .
the ratio of exchange presupposes _two_ values , which are the terms of the ratio .
property being nothing more than a sum of values , every diminution of value must be interpreted as a constant restriction of the rights of property .
the formula is elegant , simple and enables one to compute reasonably accurate values of trigonometric sines without using any geometry whatsoever .
wealth , values , so employed for pecuniary ends is capital in the business sense of the word .
all oratorical values are measured primarily from the standpoint of the `` what ; '' the `` how '' is important , too , but only in its relation to the `` what '' and `` wherefore . ''
the customs of cirebonese wedding has its own local moral values in the context of the simplicity in the cirebonese community way of carrying out large celebrations .
some idea as to the enormous values handled by the registry department may be gained from the fact that during the last fiscal year 7546 packages containing diamonds only were received from abroad , the dutiable value of which approximated $ 150,000,000 .
non-use values are usually estimated using stated preference methods such as contingent valuation or choice modelling .
all values are according to comicspriceguide .
all the values are altered .
a critical value usually gives a maximum or minimum in the case of a function of one variable , and often in the case of several independent variables , but all maxima and minima , particularly absolutely greatest and least values , are not necessarily critical values .
the survival values of play , investigations of the department of psychology and education of the university of colorado , arthur allin , ph.d. , editor , november , 1902 , vol .
meanwhile , property values have declined because of the foreclosures , the lawsuit says .
find values of the b field due to each winding individually .
odd values of hscrol will shift the gtia pixel stream into a different state that will be interpreted as different colors .
data values are the highest found for the cartridge , and might not occur in the same load ( e .
3rdly , upon the prudent constitution of the habits ; the prudent constitution being chiefly in moderation and simplicity of life , or in demanding few stimulants ; and 4thly , in health , whose importance he values highly , but not too highly .
so elizabeth sat in the back seat alone , while her brother and the contractor discoursed on the price of lumber and the relative values of wood and stone for building-purposes , and the big car went back over the way it had been before that afternoon .
however , the ussa , 1976 does recognize that this value is not consistent with the values of the avogadro constant and the boltzmann constant .
create an array to hold the values q ( i , s ) for and the array can now be filled in using a simple recursion .
history and moral values were also passed down through the generations by word of mouth , and the oral tradition was used as a form of entertainment in precolonial days .
as a result of this the relative values of silver and gold changed considerably .
the higher values with the elephants as supporters are very artistic .
johnson ! -- he will indeed be the only happy person of the party ; he values nothing _under_ heaven but his own mind , which is a spark _from_ heaven , and that will be invigorated by the addition of new ideas .
it concludes the process by compressing the values of at least some of these components over different periods , separately .
when no one values , cares , or pays attention to historical subjects , he decides to leave everything and go to his village and live with his parents .
it has written instructions , -- values , -- perhaps a secret treaty .
this is crucial since the evaluation of the density , viscosity and surface tension is based on the values averaged over the interface .
his aim was to relate all thought to determinable values of life .
from that great teacher he caught his hegelian habit of thought , his strong sense of ethical and spiritual values , and that practical habit of mind which seeks to apply moral principles to the problems of actual life .
one technique supported by most of the major database management system ( dbms ) products is the partitioning of large tables , based on ranges of values in a key field .
the similarity between the two sets of values , derived by different investigators independently , is clearly significant .
as a nation with the largest muslim population , yet also a democratic country that values diversity , italy recruited indonesia on its efforts to pursue world peace through interfaith dialog in 2009 .
the signs of which the meanings are given are in the middle column ; the sumerian values are given in the column to the left , and their meanings in assyrian in the column to the right .
there are sometimes some conflicts in values , and perhaps you deem it correct to make moralistic judgments about them .
on december 8 , 1938 , the okw had instructed all officers in all three services to be thoroughly versed in national socialism and to apply its values in all situations .
for example , latency values given as 2 .
in some cases , while running the algorithm , different values of shear and compressional velocities , density , and thickness might produce the same dispersion curve .
the method of gematria involves numeric values assigned to hebrew letters , giving every word a value , allowing one to look for patterns in the text based on those numerical values .
resulting t-values need then to be compared with the critical values of the student 's t-distribution .
the " plan , " written in the form of a villain 's exposition , describes how the united states will destroy the soviet ( russian ) people from within by means of a " fifth column " seeking to corrupt basic cultural values of the soviet society .
the constitution obligates the state to " preserve " traditional family values based on islam .
he values most those things that are most useful to him ; and never deviating from this standard , is not influenced by general opinion .
vertical hash-marks indicate the value of breeding index for a given species ; horizontal lines show the range of values of breeding index for families and orders . ]
the symbolic world of traditional piety , with its angels and demons , its friendly saints , its spatial heaven , may conserve and communicate spiritual values far better than the more sophisticated universe of religious philosophy .
it makes possible to know important places with high architectural , cultural and historical values through a hotel chain comprising restored houses and buildings , for which it takes advantage of their location in old havana , a unesco world heritage site since 1982 .
the basic idea is to eliminate turtles , or small values near the end of the list , since in a bubble sort these slow the sorting down tremendously .
in its core values and activities , the homestead has much in common with intentional communities like dancing rabbit ( missouri ) , sandhill farm ( missouri ) , and cobb hill cohousing ( vermont ) .
those values are true visibility .
when i remember this christian view of marriage , i am not surprised at the corruptions into which we have fallen ; it is an atmosphere rich for the development of industrial values .
thus it is that men of great talents often bury themselves in small places , where nobody values them at their true worth ; they fall gradually into their own ruts , and disappear without notice .
the independent gay forum mission statement is to forge a new " gay mainstream " that is committed to more conservative-libertarian values ; i .
no other industrial agency in private hands so affects all the producing forces of society and exercises such a potent influence on values .
the original values are obliterated by black bars printed across the sheet .
the sections below describe the theoretical estimates of resolution , but the real values may differ .
she lost count of time , of money , of human values .
the diagnosis of nph can be established only with the help of continuous intraventricular pressure recordings ( over 24 hours or even longer ) , since more often than not instant measurements yield normal pressure values .
if that money itself has a fluctuating value , the same article may have at different times different prices with the same value , or the same price with different values .
it was a question about which lanley had been thinking , and he answered : '' i mean a person who values himself for qualities that have no moral , financial , or intellectual value whatsoever .
the lake forms part of an antarctic specially protected area ( aspa 140 ) , comprising several separate sites on deception island , and designated as such primarily for its botanic and ecological values .
there were few locks and bars and bolts , or , even , doors , in sacramento city at that time ; and large sums in gold and great values in goods were often left exposed and almost unprotected .
the plate should be undoubtedly annexed , on its very rare appearance , by him who values his _jorrocks_ .
these values helped to determine that the average thermal bond distances are 1 .
optimism about housing values also led to a boom in home construction .
new stamps were printed also , featuring numerals ( for the low values ) , a field crossed by telegraph wires , a white-shouldered eagle , and a church of the minorite friars .
the central and eastern parts of sinaloa are rich in table lands and values , while the slopes of the mountains are thickly wooded .
i had n't any sense whatever of the moral values of the situation .
achievementsbina was awarded the constantine prize in jewish education from tel-aviv university for its success in using jewish values to promote community service and social justice in youth .
property values are always shot to hell when negroes move in .
post enlightenment science and reason did not resolve the chronic illness of the human spirit as people had hoped ; that illness was rooted in the limitations of the human body and life , and resulted in emptiness and absurdity in existential values .
the same transparency of values apply if the proposal is developed at an enterprise level , or within a lesser organizational unit .
of these libraries , polylib and ppl focus mostly on rational values , while the other libraries focus on integer values .
pride is of all sins the most hateful in the sight of god ; and of the proud , who is so mean , who so despicable as he who values himself on the merits of others ?
although umlaut letters are used in writing uralic languages , the languages do not exhibit germanic umlaut ; front and back values are intrinsic features of words and modify suffixes , not vice versa as in umlaut .
however , psnr values do not perfectly correlate with a perceived visual quality due to the non-linear behavior of the human visual system .
guess some simple values of x and y and try them .
cartoons finally featured role models for black children who imparted messages of responsibility , education , family values and friendship .
at that time , the american lifestyle was perceived as detrimental to families wishing to live according to torah values .
in the quantization stage , the representative signal values are approximated by values from a finite set .
land values increased as agriculture flourished till the time came when stock-breeders found themselves outbidden by wheat-growers or , rather , landowners found it more profitable to grow wheat or maize on lands which were economically accessible to transport .
verhaeren is perhaps the only one among modern poets who has conceived of science as of perfectly equal value with poetry , _who has discovered new moral and religious values in science , just as he had already discovered new æsthetic values in industrialism and democracy_ .
the rate of production of each resource is modified by the values for each planet .
the oldest annals show that they had already been employed as circulating media and that their relative values , or the ratio of their exchange for one another , had already been established .
furthermore , the kind of checking of apparatus that you are describing that goes on now did not go on in the eighteenth century - they had no values to check their experiments against .
the white lead in the painting the supper at emmaus had polonium-210 values of 8 .
he has always been a man very sensitive to the intellectual values of life , and fully inclined perhaps to approach the spiritual through those .
in them he began to use colour purely as figurative values .
the mission of the delta psi chi fraternity is to create and maintain an enduring society which encourages the sharing of traditions and values , respect for oneself and others , and responsibility to the university and community .
trim whitespace from the arguments and remove blank values .
this occurs when teenagers accept traditional values and cultural norms , rather than determining their own values .
in some instances , the values represented in the covenant code are more similar to present-day , western values .
these values are found by dividing the number of cross-overs by the total number of individuals which might show crossing-over , that is , males only or both males and females , as the case may be .
political conservatives in the pacific northwest tend to identify more strongly with free-market libertarian values than they do with more religious social conservatives .
here too conduct is based upon estimation of effects , freedom is relative to and subordinate to economic values .
condemned by her rank to wear rich clothing , she values only the glorious vesture of the soul , which is grace .
different fonts used , text pushing up against the margins of the graphs and merging with the values , convoluted image description etc .
their values great . ''
variation in cracking quality can be seen by studying the values in table 1 .
if the airing of aunt tildy ’ s complaint was not confined to a city office and its spectacular values lost in the multiplicity of graver legal causes , the snuff company would not suffer much , if any .
being well acquainted with the mechanism of banking , he had adopted views as to cash , credit and the circulation of values which contained an admixture of truth and falsehood .
composed of ten values as follows : one cent .
his successor , vladimir putin , opposed this , pointing out that a reburial of lenin would imply that generations of citizens had observed false values during 70 years of soviet rule .
bod values indicated high levels of organic matter .
besides being good eating i am assured that its food and even medicinal values are high .
plasma chemistry remains relatively stable with age but lower values of protein content , uric acid , cholesterol , triglycerides , and phospholipids were seen in free living flamingos .
more general results , for other values of n , can be obtained starting from there .
it will be seen from this column that the values calculated from the formula represents the experiments with fidelity .
were pounds sterling , livres , florins , piastres , & c. which are all money of account , invariable in their values , what a facility would it produce in all conversions , what an assistance to trade !
some assemblers , such as nasm provide flexible symbol management , letting programmers manage different namespaces , automatically calculate offsets within data structures , and assign labels that refer to literal values or the result of simple computations performed by the assembler .
in other words , higher heuristic values always represent situations more favorable for player a .
i am not speaking of intrinsic but of commercial values , of course .
the first depend on the mean longitudes of the planets , and always tend back to their original values when the planets return to their original positions in their orbits .
we got to go slow in selling it or we'd bust the market , wreck values and stall reconversion , so we had us a brain-storm when we heard how you cleaned up in the funeral market .
besides promoting conservative catholic values , santamaria and the movement were strongly anti-communist .
for each block the mean and standard deviation are calculated , these values change from block to block .
resource management involves the players establishing relative values for various types of available resources , in the context of the current state of the game and the desired outcome ( i .
let not him who knows not what it is to be shut out from his friends , society , and the great world , year after year , think lightly of the reward which the solitary trader , in his remote seclusion , values so highly .
the result of this separation and apparent antagonism is that we can not develop our lives symmetrically ; we are torn by conflicting purposes ; we fail to see any ideal ends in business or to find any practical values in religion .
turkish folk music ( türk halk müziği ) combines the distinct cultural values of all civilisations that have lived in anatolia and the past territories in europe and asia .
in stage five ( social contract driven ) , the world is viewed as holding different opinions , rights and values .
fishbein and ajzen ( 1975 ) represented the theory with the following equation where attitudes ( a ) are a factorial function of beliefs ( b ) and values ( v ) .
you know well enough what is involved : honor , integrity , good faith , everything a man values , or should value .
that the one may be regarded as positive , the other negative , i admit , but their values are indeterminate , and the units in the two cases are qualitatively different .
derived from molar values using molar mass of 40 .
nevertheless , how fantastic a philosophy ! -- as if the `` world of values '' _were_ independent of existence .
therefore , their labor had never returned them full values .
what the nut industry needs most is a campaign of education to tell the american public about the superior values of nuts and to correct the errors broadcasted by the meat board .
it was indicative of big values and great expectations ; but now , with murray out of the running , the district was absolutely dead .
this group is said to have had the goal of talking white americans out of their ethnic pride in their european heritage , as well as portraying christian family values as reactionary and antiquated .
yds ) are examples of local values .
his whole system of values was being upset .
my realization of this shift of values was sharpened by the announcement that howells had definitely decided to move to the metropolis , and that herne had broken up his little home in ashmont and was to make his future home on convent avenue in harlem .
we call it -- securing for the public values created by the public .
the problem is that you have introduced 3 ' y ' co-ordinates and provided only 2 values .
second order concepts correlate concepts and relations with truth values .
if the revelation of personality unites men , the stress upon mere individuality separates them , and there are countless poets of the day who glory in their eccentric individualism without remembering that it is only through a richly developed personality that poetry gains any universal values .
examples of these co-benefits are increased property values and economic activity , increased home and fire safety and reduced involuntary mobility for low-income households .
brahmanandan foundation " , constituted in memory of brahmanandan encourages projects that promote values in line with particular interests that are well informed , that have clearly defined goals , and that are innovative and risk-taking , while acknowledging traditional standards of excellence and responsibility to the music .
within a realistic domain of values that any reasonable training set might have , we will observe finite bounded numbers z .
i wish to present qianhai in an objective light , without puffery and marketing , in order to uphold wikipedia values .
the agreement between the observed and calculated values of the critical speeds was in most cases quite remarkable .
in typed lambda calculus this is not a significant problem , because built-in types may be added to carry values that are in a canonical form and have both extensional and intensional equality .
melbourne led the " house price boom , with values up 14 .
association of christian libraries ( acl ) and further reviews of his book have suggested that the eight proposed values which librarians should follow are more closely related to biblical theism than the humanistic beliefs gorman believes .
it promotes the concept there is a shared intersection of values based on the hebrew bible ( " torah " ) , brought into our culture by the founding generations of biblically oriented protestants , that is fundamental to american history , cultural identity , and institutions .
believing that he is destined for greater things than the average man , griffith is willing to sacrifice everything for the dream of his own kingdom and only values others so far as they are useful to him .
a reader 's sense of the relative values of successive and involved groups of thought , is largely indicated by his varied ( melodious ) rate of utterance .
it can be argued that conflicts between social values and other design values often represent the continuing debate between rationalism and romanticism commonly found within architecture and industrial design .
the molecular dimensions of other substances , although varying very greatly in their relative values , are of the same order of magnitude as these .
the estimated coefficients from this linear fit are used as the starting values for fitting the nonlinear model to the full data set .
thus by means of money it becomes possible to compare the values of goods of various kinds .
1889 ) , who urges that if the values of our coordinates already involve the usual measure of distance , then to give a new definition , while retaining the usual coordinates , is to incur a contradiction .
table keys and values must be either strings or numbers .
at first the fringe of new york city , then part of its suburbs , this tract lay in a region which from 1850 on began to take on great values , and which was in great demand for the homes of the rich .
the film was initially banned by the occupying supreme commander of the allied powers ( scap ) due to its portrayal of feudal values .
mrs worked for a free market economy and a society based on islamic values .
by another law , land could not be sold under execution to pay a debt unless it brought three-fourths of its value as appraised by a board of neighbors , usually themselves debtors and interested in supporting values .
in addition , ngo monitor 's gerald steinberg said that the speaker 's " intense hatred directed at israel , which is the embodiment of jewish sovereign equality in the world , is entirely inconsistent with the universal values that amnesty claims to promote .
the efforts of research-oriented short sellers to expose these frauds eventually prompted nasdaq , nyse and other exchanges to impose sudden , lengthy trading halts that froze the values of shorted stocks at artificially high values .
the court noted that the matter concerned a multiplicity of intersecting constitutional values and interests , some overlapping and some competing .
and yet , the number of electron-positron pairs in any combination is also observable , and is not given by the product of the single-particle values .
taxation of land values only forms the proper basis of taxation for the purpose of local government in the united states and canada .
senator rick santorum of pennsylvania because of the candidate 's strong family values .
on what ground can the community , or any part of it , set up a claim in strict justice to the increased land values ?
andrew blake 's films are characterized by high production values , artistic stylization , and rigorous technique .
it links past and present , and bears witness , both in itself and in its art and worship , to the abiding values of the christian faith .
the common theme of his works on auctions , industrial strategies , and financial markets is that economic actors infer from prices and other observables information about the fundamental market values .
annexed are values of 10^6 [ kappa ] for the different salts examined , w being the weight of the salt per c.c .
a typical cost function would be the sum of the squared deviations of the analysis values from the observations weighted by the accuracy of the observations , plus the sum of the squared deviations of the forecast fields and the analyzed fields weighted by the accuracy of the forecast .
nowadays , with modernism itself everywhere in retreat , the values represented by john luke have again become appealing and reassuring to us .
since 2008 , christo became a partner of bright i , which supports and promotes film in all its forms as an important means of expression of cultural , artistic and social values .
the waterfall , together with the cave and the spring of white drin river is taken under legal protection in 1983 , as nature monument due to its geomorphological , hydrological and touristic values with a surface of .
they are not merely skeletons of thought ; they are clothed with emotional values .
no , the production values are not good and the acting looks even worse , but what they lack in quality and polish , they more than appear to make up for with energy and love for the genre .
the reader who can become interested only in light , trashy literature must admit that matter of this type ranks higher in his subjective scale of values than the works of the masters .
constructive values include peace , harmony , beauty .
they have none of the colour values produced by the reflected lights in the shadows of the day .
such of these as are based solely on the relative calorific values of oil and coal are of limited value , inasmuch as the efficiencies to be obtained with oil are higher than that obtainable with coal .
if we compare values , the result will be different according to sex , even with regard to the very material compared , or to the manner in which it has been discovered .
`` if a man values a woman , '' said mr. clarence , lounging back in the arm-chair , `` he must be prepared to make sacrifices for her .
the lower values in relation to the higher are indispensable .
ireland affirms its commitment to the european union within which the member states of that union work together to promote peace , shared values and the well-being of their peoples .
for anyone moving outside western tradition should soon discover the truth that the values found in different civilizations are incommensurate .
i need to know values at a bunch of points within those four squares .
for what that principle offers is not merely a standard for determining the relations of different classes and groups of producers , but a scale of moral values .
because these first two fat entries store special values , there are no data clusters 0 or 1 .
i suspect what you ( miss- ) remember is the proof that reals are uncountable ( by trying to enumerate binary values from [ 0,1 ] and showing via diagonalization that that fails ) .
if it do not succeed -- and it does not by any means succeed -- it is because opposing values check it .
during two sub-periods , 1837-1850 and 1854-1867 , rajna 's calculated values for the range differ very persistently in one direction from those observed ; wolf 's formula was applied by c. chree [ 25 ] to these two periods separately .
chapter lxii indicating devices alternating current ammeters or voltmeters indicate the _virtual_ values of the current or pressure respectively , that is to say , they indicate , the _square root of the mean square of a variable quantity_ .
through its concept and affirmed values , the university was intended as a model for society and as an important participant in its dynamics .
yes , i repeat , the postoffice department carries upon its payrolls too many non-producers of service values -- too many mere payroll-raiders on the postal revenues .
vision 2015the heloa has developed a strategic plan setting out " our mission , our vision and our underpinning values for the period up to 2015 " .
socially created land values and rents belong to the community because the community , not the private proprietor , has produced them .
physically , they have the relatively low melting points and high electronegativity values associated with post-transition metals .
burgess park was purchased by the town in 1989 for its historic and scenic values .
it would depend on which crops failed , because different crops have different nutritional values .
neoconservatism drew from liberalism its intense focus on the promotion of " universal values " , in this case democracy , human rights , free trade , women 's rights and minority protections .
romney 's rise to a leadership role in the church reflected the church 's journey from a fringe pioneer religion to one that was closely associated with mainstream american business and values .
by contrast , the arguments are the values supplied to the procedure when it is called .
the white house commission on remembrance was established by congress ( pl 106-579 ) to promote the values of memorial day by acts of remembrance throughout the year .
in functional languages , functions are first-class values and can be passed anywhere .
all other argument values are fine because atan2 was written by experts ( one hopes ) .
~eosin.~ -- there are several commercial varieties of eosin , which , from the bacteriological point of view , possess very different values .
he promoted conservative christian family values , while actively campaigning against issues such as divorce , abortion and same-sex marriage .
it can be generalized for all states ( including mixed ) , for instance , as expectation values mentioned above .
besides many examples which i could urge , the very last verse of his last satire , upon which he particularly values himself in his preface , is not yet sufficiently explicated .
an inverse transformation of these n spectral partitions then leads to n values y ( k ) for the time window , which consists of n sample values .
of course , for many species esthetic values far outweigh economic ones derived through commercialization .
if the fancy is occupied by the image of a single person , whose qualities have had the power of precipitating this revolution , all the values gather about that one image .
the triangle the triangular form ( in mantel clocks , lampshades , highboys , bookcase foundations , and sometimes where it appears in wall paper or turcoman rug designs ) expresses movement in repose admirably , and has real decorative values .
a pilot study may be run before a major experiment , in order to test out different procedures or determine optimal values of the experimental variables before the researcher moves on to the main experiment .
wikipedia is , and should remain , an predominantly american ( or western , if you prefer ) organization , which goes against its founding values .
the insight meditation movement in the united states was founded on modernist secular values .
hazlitt ’ s genius for assortment and sense of relative values were not developed ; he was in no wise a constructive critic .
its measuring and analyzing , its hoping and fearing , hating and desiring , never give it a true measure of life , nor any sense of real values .
the day was used to underline the values and principles of the afrikaner people .
attacks on l-diversitythis is useful because in real data sets attribute values may be skewed or semantically similar .
scada system might automatically monitor whether the value in an analogue point lies outside high and low- limit values associated with that point .
this calculator shows projected values for any age and any premium .
he values his land at $ 50 an acre .
both communities share similar values and cultures , which has been the primary reason for so many bangladeshis to settle in the middle east .
except that that is both a misrepresentation of the accounts in the article , and an attempt to suppose that a deity should have your values and priorities .
in an anthropological sense , culture is society based on the values and ideas without influence of the material world ( radcliffe-brown ) .
full width at half maximum ( fwhm ) is an expression of the extent of a function , given by the difference between the two extreme values of the independent variable at which the dependent variable is equal to half of its maximum value .
localized peak values are often cited , but average values are also important to human health .
the small town is like a pack of cards ; the rank of the components being once established , it is vain for them to attempt other values .
the google toolbar 's pagerank is updated infrequently , so the values it shows are often out of date .
363 ) , where the values of _y_ in the case of the ox are plotted as a straight line , and the corresponding values for the sheep ( extracted from the above table ) are seen to form a more or less regular and even curve .
bihari cuisine is predominantly vegetarian because traditional bihar society , influenced by buddhist and hindu values of non-violence , did not eat eggs , chicken , fish and other animal products .
article 29 of the convention on the rights of the child requires states to ensure that children are enabled to develop a respect for their own cultural identity , language and values and for the culture , language and values of others .
in avoiding the unjustifiable imposition of western ideas and values upon the chinese , and yet orienting sun ’ s thought with respect to the west , the interpretation will have to resort to several fairly evident means .
maximum l may be only very slightly longer than other values of l .
starting from the proposition that psychic income is the foundation of all values , we shall go on , however , to trace causes that give value to all the physical agents , and to the most indirect of want-gratifiers .
if the capitalization is reasonable , there must be some way to demonstrate the fact , and it seems as if a properly made physical valuation , with due allowance for the intangible values , is at least a step in the right direction .
the b values should be interpreted such that the experimental group is being compared against the control group .
t ] o instill values in young people .
flex dollars also refers to a term used by an insurance company to assign values to an employees benefits .
for h = 11,500 the temperature of minimum resistance was about 50° ; for much lower or higher values of h the actual minimum did not occur within the range of temperature dealt with .
to prevent such waste from inner weakness and to `` encourage excellence in each individual , '' to use doctor small's fine phrase , we need a childhood saturated with the sense of personal values on the plane of affection .
for each ability score , the player rolls 4d6 , and adds the three highest values , resulting in scores ranging from three to eighteen , skewed towards higher numbers , averaging 12 .
in a sense , the problem is that your scheme reuses the same keystream ks to encrypt two values ( m and ec ( m ) ) , which is a big no-no for stream ciphers .
this can be solved by a simplified form of the equation , or by running monte carlo simulations and using random values .
in other words , the values of these invariants classify the possible completions of the theory of boolean algebras .
as a rule , however , canning is preferable for these products , because food values and natural flavors are better preserved by that method .
nowhere outside of the best greek art shall we find , as in michelangelo 's works , forms whose tactile values so increase our sense of capacity , whose movements are so directly communicated and inspiring .
started in different times in the history of the country , the programme was intended and had mainstream goal to promote gdp growth for the national economy and economical and social values in the country .
the values of urban romanians are more complex than those of peasants .
i have always had a nagging feeling that for all their propensity for liberal values and civilised norms , these people ( south africans ) are dirty .
`` if we 're going to be rabbits , human values will change .
a great truth is emphasized in this book , namely , that in the ordinary processes of cooking the organic elements become inorganic and food values are destroyed .
assigning the appropriate values for dielectric permittivity of the protein , membrane , and aqueous regions is of great importance .
he went carefully into the question of refraction , the importance of which tycho had been the first astronomer to recognise , though he only applied it at low altitudes , and had not arrived at a true theory or accurate values .
the sum of the different present values thus found was the value of the franchise sought .
in short , the weakness of the ordinary financial calculation upon existing conditions is that it attempts to estimate future stumpage values without knowledge of the true factor which will determine them .
in addition many stories were used to convey important morals and values .
the values of the _man_ as weight , even in modern times , have varied immensely , _i.e._ from little more than 2 _lbs._ to upwards of 160 .
in the old-fashioned understanding of renormalization , gravity particles would attract each other and adding together all of the interactions results in many infinite values which cannot easily be cancelled out mathematically to yield sensible , finite results .
rational functions can be either finite or infinite for finite values , or finite or infinite for infinite x values .
and since all factories are built on ground , and most of them in places where ground is peculiarly valuable , the rent paid for it must , on the average , be compensated in the values of all things made in factories .
the project , entitled noma , aims to reflect ethical values of the organisation in its design , construction and its relationship with employees and the surrounding communities .
by such methods we will make our contribution to the world 's peace , which no nation values more highly , and avoid the opprobrium which must fall upon the nation that ruthlessly breaks it .
islam and christianity as systems of salvation ( an area in which there is substantially more divergence between the two religions than in regard to moral values ) .
unlike most of banton 's records up until that point , the track is distinguished by its stripped-down production values , acoustic guitar accompaniment by glen brown , and socially and politically conscious lyrics .
the story of the clash between a young girl 's desire for material goods and the older generation 's traditional values , it was published in 1983 .
this particular set of equations however is consistent and has a solution for any values of a , e , h , l , m , n , p , q , and r ( and you can choose any value for either f or g too ) .
the example below enumerates the values of several common constants in the ado ( activex data objects ) recordset .
as their desire for wealth grows , they discard spiritual and creative values .
the moral permissibility ( mp ) proposal is that it should value staying within the bounds of moral permissibility ( and otherwise have cev values ) .
by giving to the condenser proper values , any desired difference of phase between the primary and secondary energizing circuits may be obtained .
those who buy with a keen eye on the investment purpose , always buy unused copies of uncommon values .
a byte is a unit of storage than can contain any number from 0 through 255 -- 256 values in all .
all inhabitants were expected to help in any task necessary , promoting the values of equality .
the bot fixes minor problems that caused the original month values to result in cs1 date errors , thereby fixing two errors with one edit .
ka values of triazolium ions lie in the range 16 .
public awareness of marine birds -- their manifold values , ecological requirements , and problems -- is prerequisite to their protection .
does not apply to isbn , but typically data must lie within maximum and minimum preset values .
curiously enough , a perception of values which inhere in the associated and co-ordinated efforts of school and library has not , as yet , dawned upon school men to any appreciable degree .
later , we entirely forget the connection , although it remains true , that every time our eyes recognise reality , we are , as a matter of fact , giving tactile values to retinal impressions .
concerning civilization , he had gone away with one set of values , had returned with another set of values .
when i get depth on that , it ought to show good values , do n't you think ? ''
euro gold and silver commemorative coins of various face values .
for example , the state can be used to store the best solution found so far , or α , β values for branch and bound pruning .
as recently as 2006 , the bbc reported that maciej giertych , an mep of the right-wing league of polish families , had expressed admiration for franco 's stature who allegedly " guaranteed the maintenance of traditional values in europe .
the software provides various facilities for computing values of financial instruments and related calculations .
this is illustrated by interesting quotations of prices and values , and enumeration of goods obtained in trade , and of the products of native industry .
also by doing it this the way the estimates will be standardized across thousands of pages allowing me to quickly switch values to newer estimates when they are released ( for example the 2012 estimates should come out in june of 2013 ) .
analyzing the shapes of signs , she finally assigned conjectural values to the 8 sublinear signs of the prose system , suggesting that they are the 8 notes of a scale .
a change of center distance is accomplished by changes in operating values for pitch diameter , circular pitch , diametral pitch , pressure angle , and tooth thicknesses or backlash .
a treatise on the character , methods for the determination of the values , etc .
the conversation slowly became a praise of working values with an occasional homily to flaunt the more ensconced rural virtues .
the values and colors are : 2_c_. , bistre ; 4_c_. , gray-blue ; 8_c_. , yellow ; 16_c_. , lilac ; 24_c_. , green ; 36_c_. , blue ; 48_c_. , rose ; 96_c_. , gray-green .
from his contribution history , it can be seen that he changes dates on articles to false values .
he studies the properties and values of the different woods and places them where they will be most useful .
beginning in 1908 , the german post offices in turkey issued an additional set of stamps which it sold at the same time as the series overprinted with values in turkish piasters .
while the value of α can be estimated from the values of the constants appearing in any of its definitions , the theory of quantum electrodynamics ( qed ) provides a way to measure α directly using the quantum hall effect or the anomalous magnetic moment of the electron .
fixed point data types are convenient for representing monetary values .
the _raison d'être_ of the new credit is the new values which have come into existence : the new plan of the entrepreneur , _validated by the banker_ , attains a value equal to the present worth of the extra products which it promises .
the author who lugs instruction and information into his stories will find the boys and girls skipping all that he values , or laying down his books with laughter and derision .
these values are of the same order of magnitude as those of the cathode rays .
reindeer form the circulating medium , and all values are expressed in this four-footed currency .
based on the accounted changes of productivity and production volume values we can explicitly conclude on which part of the production function the production is .
`` you will grant that the individual in the controversy would likely be able to judge more correctly with regard to values ? ''
i accordingly caused the regulations governing this branch of the customs service to be modified so that values are determined upon a hearing in which all the parties interested have an opportunity to be heard and to know the evidence against them .
throughout this work the author has in every instance purposely omitted the question of values .
the mixing of high- and low-gi carbohydrates produces moderate gi values .
that the incident hardly suggests dramatic treatment is beside the mark ; schnitzler , with his invariable deftness of touch , has painted a dozen vital portraits ; the priest is superb , the character values of exquisite balance .
substituting in equation ( 2 ) the values here given e = 2π_f_li = 2π × 60 × .5 × 3 = 565 volts .
to give way to that temptation will be to rob victory of any permanent values .
eta and beta reductions are deductive steps that do not alter the values of expressions .
sic uses a special assembly language with its own operation codes that hold the hex values needed to assemble and execute programs .
the true values of biography 9 ii .
for some it may radiate from the shropshire life he so finely etches ; for others , in the vivid artistic simplicity and unity of values , through which shropshire lads and landscapes are presented .
when she recovered self-control she drew from her sinful bosom an old purse filled with coins of different values .
likewise , the orientation of a plane can be described with two values as well , for instance by specifying the orientation of a line normal to that plane , or by using the strike and dip angles .
physician engagement is an intangible process that depends on the degree to which doctors are proud , loyal , and committed to a hospital 's mission , vision , and values .
=exchange tables of sterling and indian rupee currency= , upon a new and extended system , embracing values from one farthing to one hundred thousand pounds , and at rates progressing , in sixteenths of a penny , from 1_s._ 9_d._ to 2_s._ 3_d._ per rupee .
it values them because of the lessons which they teach .
the farm expert advised that he would have to go to other comparable farm areas to determine pure farm values .
it is , however , in another field that we must look for the most important spiritual results from the contemplation of death , that is in what we may call the field of spiritual values .
in the end , it 's our ideals , our values that built america , values that allowed us to forge a nation made up of immigrants from every corner of the globe , values that drive our citizens still .
we do not believe that advertising belongs in a project devoted to education , and one that is driven by the values consistent with a balanced , neutral encyclopedia .
these are some of the questions which may arise so long as the values for the _constant of aberration_ are still conflicting ; but it requires considerable knowledge of astronomy to appreciate them fully .
the other 5 values are assigned codes beginning with 11 .
both lat and lon values are in decimal degrees .
sometimes these values will differ slightly , while at other times their sites may differ significantly .
sixty-eight percent of the usage panel finds the word unacceptable in the sentence a number of corporations have implemented employee wellness programs , aimed at enhancing spiritual values , emotional stability , fitness , and nutrition .
a finite signed measure is defined in the same way , except that it is only allowed to take real values .
she can scarce crawl with age ; but you must know she values herself upon her birth ; and if you mind , spurns at every one that comes within her reach .
| total.| cross-over values .
it has been applied to economic and social classes as well to cultural and ethical values .
there are several questions which frequently arise in the mind of a person who begins to study food values .
the sole possible proof is the proof that actually exists -- the direct unhindered realization of those values .
i assume i need to set that box to be a field , but then how to write the file 's metadata , and how to capture multiple values into multiple tag values .
science reveals to us the relations and inter-dependence of things in the physical world and their relations to our physical well-being ; philosophy reveals their relations to our mental and spiritual life , their meanings and their ideal values .
the only rational method of storing currency values in computers is as fixed point numbers - that is , as an integer representing the smallest possible denomination .
as well as embracing the classic stivell fare of breton , scottish and irish instrumentation , this early nod at world music includes oriental and african sounds as well as a full orchestra and lavish production values .
this absence of humour , this superhuman seriousness bred of heavy traditions peculiarly english , this sobriety nourished by sacerdotal port , give the victim quite a wrong sense of values and proportions .
old and new values as rows of virtual tables named deleted and inserted .
aiss was formed as a legal entity with its stated goals of protecting the interests and image of steaua supporters , as well as identifying and promoting the club 's perennial values .
the government has learned lessons from former experiences in the fluctuation of money values , so that the paper dollar , or peso , has been officially fixed at forty-four cents gold .
a trained salesman familiar with values in the world of merchandise would consider this market one of the least exacting , most constant , and remunerative .
variables may be of many types ; real or integer numbers , boolean values or strings , for example .
to become use-values commodities must be universally alienated ; they must enter the sphere of exchange ; but they are subject to exchange in their capacity of exchange values .
i call them different ; because these two portions of the precious metals are of different values all over europe .
pwll-y-wrach wood is designated a site of special scientific interest ( ssi ) because of its special habitat values and the existence of some quite rare plants , including the small leaved lime tree and the lesser butterfly-orchid .
american citizen without a trial or due process , however , opposes all ofthe values that the u .
i went by line and detail , nobody having ever taught me anything about mass and tonic values , still less about the difference between art and nature , and the necessity for transposing nature into the keys of art .
in 1946 prince franz josef ii had two denominations of coins minted , with face values of 10 francs and 20 francs ; and ten years later gold coins with face values of 25 francs , 50 francs and 100 francs .
up to a high order of approximation , mutual gravitational perturbations between major or minor planets only cause periodic variations in their orbits , that is , parameters oscillate between maximum and minimum values .
in each initial moment , one of the values α or β is zero , while the other has a minimum .
`` only , '' replied eugene , `` that he is well in health , and that my father much values his services . ''
please be honest and elaborate to share your perspective , with respect to the changing indian social values .
their slots have different values .
“ the values given are the means of observations .
be this as it may , it was holland that revived the long-forgotten science of values in the barbizon painters .
a major distinction from chord and tapestry is that there is no hashing of search keys of resources , which allows related resources to be near each other in the skip graph ; this property makes searches for values within a given range feasible .
smalls asked both to stay in the bank overnight to correct the sales values .
after all , let us , in our character of knowers , not be ungrateful towards such determined reversals of the ordinary perspectives and values , with which the mind had for too long raged against itself with an apparently futile sacrilege !
mikuli holds that an appeal to chopin 's manuscripts is of no use as they are full of slips of the pen -- wrong notes and values , wrong accidentals and clefs , wrong slurs and 8va markings , and omissions of dots and chord-intervals .
new zealand values and interests advanced through participation in regional and international security systems .
from these , my conceptualization of clinical , and the values on which my clinical practice rests , could be extrapolated .
“ take it , ” she said , “ and be gone. ” “ ‘ we exchanged values , and i made my bow and went .
thus in all respects a tax upon land values is the cheapest tax by which a large revenue can be raised—giving to the government the largest net revenue in proportion to the amount taken from the people .
_wor._ you see , sir , how little he values your daughter 's disdain .
since other values use round numbers , it is assumed the value should be 25,000 .
neither of them is sufficiently eager for the good things of life to have a true and unerring sense of financial values .
mfc-type bod sensors underestimate bod values in the presence of these electron acceptors .
the declared or money values of our total exports and official value of our imports since sir robert peel 's tariff was passed in 1842 , have stood as follows : -- imports , official value .
but here we are approaching the veiled region of artistic values which it would be improper and indeed dangerous for me to enter .
uw-madison is one of the best values in higher education .
the plus values amounted to 3,301,481 dr. in 1898 , 3,533,755 dr. in 1899 , and 3,442,713 dr. in 1900 .
there are few subjects on which ideas vary so greatly as values .
a common challenge is to fill vacancies with new members who have prosocial values , interests and abilities which are compatible with the existing group .
it stores pixels as one byte each for rgb ( red , green , and blue ) values with a one byte shared exponent .
or it may mean that the subject to be represented does not reveal that harmony and lack of contrasts which the values of a people are capable of producing .
the colonial exports comprise a variety of similar finished and made-up articles , to the extent of probably about four millions sterling , to which the same rate of home values , so swelled by labour and profits , will apply .
the one tends to deny physical values to love .
christian conservatives mobilize to rev up values voters " matt stearns lexington herald-leader , september 25 , 2006 he has been interviewed and has appeared in the media on several occasions , including larry king live .
`` it is good sense and good business for a state to show up with large tax values and low tax rates .
agf of accusing leofrank of being anti-tamil values , just because he is from karnataka .
an attribute grammar is a formal way to define attributes for the productions of a formal grammar , associating these attributes to values .
he could not distinguish between the relative values of the different branches of study .
pore water pressure data aids determining stratigraphy and is primarily used to correct tip friction values for those effects .
flight planning systems may need to use the unrounded values in their internal calculations for improved accuracy .
of the latter all values from 1 to 90c .
with particular values of the thickness of the plate of air the two systems may coincide so as to be seen as a single system , but a slight alteration of thickness will cause a separation .
the novel of manners is a literary genre that deals with aspects of behavior , language , customs and values characteristic of a particular class of people in a specific historical context .
pidgeot points out , it won 't be random unless there are no gaps in primary key values .
cold at heart , a shrewd and a conniving businessman who even places human values and relationships below his greed for money .
when rotations are performed in the right order , the values of the rotation angles of the final frame will be equal to the euler angles of the final frame in the corresponding convention .
the pseudo-inverse is composed of the 3n-6 eigenvectors and their respective non-zero eigen values .
zindagi ( everything happens in life ) written by chaudhry afzal haq earned a good name in urdu literature in novels , historical truths , ups and downs of life for developing moral values and guidance of young generation .
as previously suggested these economic terms apply appropriately to things rather than to intrinsic values .
considering the fees [ a ] we sailors have to pay , it ’ s a shame that we should have to put up with a place which no farmer who values the lives of his hogs would stow ’ em in .
if the moral and spiritual values are the supreme values of society , then it is in the interests of society itself that these values should receive proper recognition in formal education for citizenship .
plotting values of c for channels of different inclination appeared to indicate that it also depended on the slope of the stream .
the members of the parties who sat in the first lower house represented an overwhelmingly preponderant interest of the landowning class of the country , so that a revision of land values and consequently a reduction of the land tax were among their rallying cries .
the quillen-lichtenbaum conjecture ( from about 1971 ) about the relationship of the values of the dedekind zeta function of number fields at specific locations ( negative integers ) is named after him and daniel quillen .
n values with each sample .
in more recent operating systems , a " core dump " is a file containing the memory image of a particular process , or the memory images of parts of the address space of that process , along with other information such as the values of processor registers .
his father george was a blue collar kind of a guy who believed that good old fashion family values were instilled by using the belt -- then followed up with screaming " now shut up before i really give you something to cry about !
willem de muynck describes an " objective-realist " version of the ensemble interpretation featuring counterfactual definiteness and the " possessed values principle " , in which values of the quantum mechanical observables may be attributed to the object as objective properties the object possesses independent of observation .
they touch upon our conscience about the bygone ancient values of life .
gallery 45 is a room rich in comparative values .
for example , a map might contain keys representing every unique word in a text and values representing the number of times that word appears in the text .
there were also two tables , one `` a mahogany spider-make tea-table , £1 11_s._ '' and `` 1 mahogany table £11 , '' showing that articles of this wood obtained good values even then .
but he 's a man of a great estate , and values nobody .
btrieve allows for duplicate key values in an index .
colorado conservation voters ( ccv ) works to turn conservation values into colorado policy .
i was tearing large strips from its values when addicks ' bankers , who happened to be business friends of mine , sought to enlist me on their side of the gas war .
if necessary , a workaround is to use explicit limit values in your api queries ( typically 5000 for flagged bots , 500 for some expensive queries ) .
she went on , holding him as he held her embraced , pouring herself out in a swift rush of eager utterance : '' come back and help us readjust values .
according to archeologists , these figures on beams have tantric values .
this brings us to the matter of instrumental values -- topics studied because of some end beyond themselves .
problems and values of today ; a series of student 's guidebooks for the study of contemporary life .
from the beginning of the 19th century , the policy imperialist of france ended with the defeat of all the resistances armed to senegal and the installation with a policy of christianization and assimilation of new colony to the cultural values of the metropolis .
in this case , just divide the allowed range up into many values , say a million , and try each , to determine which is optimal .
these values have been adopted by the 27 general assembly of international astronomical union as current best estimates as the iau ( 2009 ) system of astronomical constants .
but , as this namee was different in the languages of the different tribes inhabiting the country , the same character came often to have several distinct phonetic values .
and yet , beyond her eyes , she values thee , ’ tis for thy sake alone she ’ s glad to see .
the promotion of bourgeois values contrasted with the decline of aristocratic norms .
it merely seeks to extend this society 's values so they dominate us more fully in our daily lives .
web storage currently provides a better programmatic interface than cookies because it exposes an associative array data model where the keys and values are both strings .
`` meaning '' values , like sound values , are never precisely fixed in a mechanical and universally agreed-upon scale , they are relative , not absolute .
it is seen as advancing civil rights and liberties and , notwithstanding clause aside , has become a cornerstone of canadian values for most canadians .
the properties of these graphical entities are revealed to autolisp as association lists in which values are paired with autocad " group codes " that indicate properties such as definitional points , radii , colors , layers , linetypes , etc .
it is an interesting mix between the egalitarian , pluralistic , inclusive values coming from the left and the values of learning and of observance coming from the right .
christian political and social movements and organizations characterized by their strong support of social values they deem traditional in the united states and other western countries .
the lecture series experienced a five years interregnum compelled by the abacha dictatorship and the hounding of members of the national association of seadogs and other citizens of nigeria involved in the fight for the democratic values of june 12 , for which many were tortured and unjustly incarcerated .
their values are shown in the next figure .
142-4 values all due to , kr .
the guardian greatly values the services of the friends in japan .
he regarded the future of american civilization as dependent on the survival of southern regionalism and agrarian values .
zelimkhan was the most celebrated of these abreks , and is largely symbolic of the values of the stories and the memory of the abreks .
bush nodded in tillotson 's direction , she asked if the president , given the importance his campaign placed on " family values , " wouldn 't like to respond to the new york post story .
meaning you can have oodles of columns between one value and the next , and two values will still connect .
one can not help supposing that the war will bring about a readjustment of values . ''
thou art not great. ” the magician is nevertheless sent as a guest to zarathustra ’ s cave ; for , in his heart , zarathustra believed until the end that the magician was a higher man broken by modern values .
by the way , i consider kindness to be one of the values we foster here at the teahouse .
an unfailing sign of the amateur , at least of the amateur with no innate sense of fictional values , is a story made up of hard and angular blocks of narration , description , and dialogue .
the origins of this form of racism lay in early-socialized negative feelings about blacks associated with traditional conservative values .
it may be asked whether there is any reason to think that there is now less regard for the higher , the qualitative values of life , than at other periods .
there are a number of matrix norms that act on the singular values of the matrix .
in addition to sheet stamps , two values , 10 cents and 15 cents , were produced as coil stamps for use in vending machines in several locations throughout malaysia .
: flag : /n./ a variable or quantity that can take on one of two values ; a bit , particularly one that is used to indicate one of two outcomes or is used to control which of two things is to be done .
the religious basis will be a blend of christian platonism and christian stoicism , since it must be founded on that faith in absolute spiritual values which is common to christianity and platonism , with that sturdy defiance of tyranny and popular folly which was the strength of stoicism .
the values given are the resistances per square foot at 10 ft. per sec .
the boy solves his problem in algebra , finding out the unknown quantity by those values which are given him ; and can we not also infer something of the _unknown_ from the great panorama that passes unceasingly before us ?
polyetheretherketone ( peek ) has relatively low outgassing values ( 0 .
almost all programming languages have notations for atomic values such as integers , floating-point numbers , and strings , and usually for booleans and characters ; some also have notations for elements of enumerated types and compound values such as arrays , records , and objects .
a type whose values are identifiers naming types in the first column of this table .
the sfc models are solved in different ways depending on the aspect of research but in general initial values are assigned to the stocks and then the model is calibrated or estimated .
but at the same time he should study mass drawing with paint from the purely visual point of view , in order to be introduced to the important study of tone values and the expression of form by means of planes .
extraordinary characters and inhuman entities can have skill values far above the normal range .
already , though her pulses were still beating rapturously , she found that the personal values were gradually assuming their right position and importance in her outlook .
he had to sell commodities brought out in the venus at 50 per cent below their proper values . )
a remarkable experiment in cattle values at one of the stations , for example , the entire carcass of a steer and the milk of an holstein cow were analyzed .
the invariant measure function m ( x ) can be best understood by supposing that x is known to take values only in the bounded interval ( a , b ) , and that no other information is given .
while seen by supporters as an " intellectual pioneer who affirmed true islamic values and .
_overhead charges versus unit values._—there is much in various parts of this paper concerning overhead charges , but very little about the items considered in determining the unit values or unit prices used ; and does not the latter greatly affect the former ?
all the values of civilization accumulated in the course of centuries are rejected , all traditional ideas of morality , justice , and law give way to the primacy of race , its instincts , its needs and interests .
substituting these values in formula ( 1 ) _l_ = 4 × ( 3.1416 ) ² × 10² × 500² ÷ ( 20 × 10⁹ ) = .00494 henry ~ques .
where , then , it will be asked , do we reach the point in the æsthetic scale at which values begin to require metaphysical or theological postulates ?
... what you want to do is to find the right-size audience , made up of people who believe in the values that the magazine reflects . ''
the council for exceptional children , the national center for learning disabilities , and the higher education consortium for special education praised the bill because it " values the critical role of research in developing effective practices to support positive outcomes for children and youth with disabilities .
what are the values and limitations of ceremonial control ?
jihadist globalism struggles against market- and justice globalism as it seeks to mobilize the global muslim community of believers ( umma ) in defense of islamic values and beliefs that are thought to be under severe attack by the forces of secularism and consumerism .
ward 's upbringing was steeped both in commercial and religious values and he began working in his father as a wagon-driver during his teenage years .
in april 2007 field told the sunday star-times he would form a new political party based on family values .
both the designed artifact ( and subsequent use ) and the process of designing such an object causes reflection on existing values , mores , and practices in a culture .
takashi itamochi , president of nikkatsu , japan 's oldest major film studio , then made the decision to put his own company 's high production values and professional talent into the lucrative pink film genre .
reflectivity values also decreased with increasing height .
constant values of this argument correspond to constant values of f , and these constant values occur if x increases at the same rate that vt increases .
the interstellar wars book features extensive notes on period earth society , vilani culture and values , and updated spaceship construction and combat rules .
at home , you 're a vital part of the empire -- a crucial part of our military , and contract police on any world that really values law and order .
merchants once again produced tokens , but they were now machine made and typically larger than their 17th century predecessors , with values of a halfpenny or more .
so2 values do not define higher aqi values greater than 200 .
the usual alternative to output parameters in c and related languages is to return a single data structure containing all return values .
social values have as their function the guidance and control of the activities of men .
residents of the kingman park neighborhood opposed the facility on the grounds that it would be noisy , near a public school , cause traffic congestion , and cause a reduction in property values .
in 1634 there was yet another edition which again changed a few values .
( second trial if individual values are known . )
real estate and depreciation are probably the two items in which there will be the largest differences in opinion as to values , and both should be determined by the personal examination of experts , following some prearranged system .
positive values rotate right , negative values rotate left .
at the same time it examined and subverted the values of society with regard to its political and social views .
therefore , the values of insolation diminish from a maximum at the equator to a minimum at both poles .
the society for humanistic judaism ( shj ) , founded in 1969 by rabbi sherwin wine embraces a human-centered philosophy that combines the celebration of jewish culture and identity with an adherence to humanistic values and ideas .
typical championship golf courses have par values of 72 , comprising four par-threes , ten par-fours , and four par-fives .
he knows values .
seaton-watson and ćurčin had been long-time friends and to all intents and purposes ćurčin 's venture was originally an attempt to implant british values and other changes along western expectations .
to say that a rug is strong in color gives no hint of its hues or values , only its chromas .
`` jonathan , '' i added , `` i am afraid you have not a proper subordination of values .
( _c_ ) _right of way and real estate._—the valuation work which has been accomplished during the past decade , and the study of values for taxation and rate-making , have brought into prominence the perplexing features of land values as applied to corporation property .
furthermore , it is a matter of historical knowledge that it was the custom of ancient races of men to account for values by an entirely different method from what we use to-day .
with maps of great britain and ireland , continental europe , switzerland , street plans of london and paris , tables of the comparative values of united states and european moneys , a traveler 's calendar of ecclesiastical and popular festivals , fairs , etc .
to calculate the error values , apply the forney algorithm .
rich in its actualities , richer in its spiritual values , every line moves with the double force of observation and implication .
resonate was founded by bryan gernert , andreas hunn , sara taylor fagan and john brady in 2008 in alexandria , va with the goal to reach people according to their personal values , level of activism and brand market motivations beyond political party affiliation or basic demographics .
republicans feared of a united labor force would taking over the economy and eventually politics , overturning the plantation economy , race hierarchy , and social values of hawaii .
to employ any newly subjected race or tribe as soldiers or in any responsible capacity is unwise , for ties of blood are liable to lead to treachery ; to trust to the idiosyncrasies and personal values of any native interpreter is equally impolitic .
kreacher disdains sirius , mainly due to his devotion to his former masters ( regulus black in particular ) and sirius having broken with the family 's pure-blood values .
now , it is easy to introduce uniformity , even where arithmetical values are not known .
with all due respect , i do feel that you have jumped on this entry and wish to impose a very narrow , very unhelpful set of values , which in my opinion , are at odds with the values of wikipedia itself .
on the contrary , the artist who considers the light and dark of values , sees the light _in_ the scene he is painting , and observes that it pervades all parts of it .
the monk traditionally occupied a unique position in the transmission of khmer culture and values .
the values which were actually produced in the new series were -- ½d .
an essay in genealogy ( 2002 ) , williams identifies the two basic values of truth as accuracy and sincerity , and tries to address the gulf between the demand for truth and the doubt that any such thing exists .
he values his soul ; but , when he compares it to the great soul of mankind , he almost forgets and loses sight of it : for the governing principle of his heart is , to estimate things according to their worth .
also , an appendix , containing a complete set of tables ; particularly four new tables , shewing the probabilities of life in london , norwich , and northampton , and the values of two joint lives .
he values his poverty because he does not have to worry about losing his possessions and he lives at the expense of the state .
_by the numbers of people , and the proportion of money amongst them , the accidental values of lands are to be computed._ 33 _how to proportion the rates of a commodity in one place , unto the rates of the same in another place._ ibid .
the financial panic of 1857 had been accompanied by a depression of land values , which caused douglas grave concern for his holdings in chicago , and no little immediate distress .
indeed , it was found that american preschoolers preferred excited smiles and perceived them as happier than taiwanese children did , and these values were seen to be mirrored in storybook pictures .
it accomplished the first by making police a function of society as a whole , by stressing the appropriateness of behavior rather than its legality ; and it has given the chinese ethical values despite their sorry political condition .
labour , he tells us in the _contradictions_ more explicitly , is the principle of wealth , the power which creates or abolishes values , or puts them in proportion one to another , and also distributes them .
=learning social values in the community.= -- the school is the door to larger social opportunity than the home can provide , but it is not the only door .
as he had never seen a stone of the kind , he showed it to a good many persons as a curiosity in a small way , and after a while he came to value it about as a boy values a marble of the kind called real agate .
as another example , some of the amd opteron processors and kaveri apus can be configured for lower tdp values .
total values .
college democrats - educate and inform students about democratic values and candidates .
the format was the same as on the british show , and the 15 incremental prize amounts had the same numeric values , from 100 up to 1,000,000 .
the far more important distinction lies between the average of a few , with its fluctuating values and very imperfect and occasional attainment of its ultimate goal , and the average of many and its gradually close approximation to its ultimate value : i.e .
as connoisseurs are wont to do , the roman millionaires studied commercial values rather than artistic qualities .
_bartering transactions_. -- the following schedule of approximate values of commodities in the agúsan , 1905 to 1909 , will serve to show the commercial depredations committed on manóbos and _conquistas_ by the bisáyas who have ever looked upon them as their legitimate prey .
however in general the optimal values of the primal and dual problems need not be equal .
the node id serves not only as identification , but the kademlia algorithm uses the node id to locate values ( usually file hashes or keywords ) .
these new values are called excesses .
by unifying its network of funeral homes and cemeteries under one brand name , sci believed it could establish recognizable and communicable brand values .
first of all , to mind wearing a dress many times because it indicates a small bank account , is to exhibit a false notion of the values in life .
sometime in 1885 , " twee " ( afrikaans for " two " ) was overprinted on a few of the 4-pence stamps , halving their values .
though there is no such thing as a general rise of values , there is such a thing as a general rise of prices .
a plain-trick game is a trick-taking game in which cards do not have individual values , and one instead counts tricks won to determine the winner .
=the use of the dry point.= -- if harmony has not been sufficiently attained , the _dry point_ is used on the bare metal , to modify the values incompletely rendered , or expressed too harshly .
let us , not ignoring the dross , give fit stress to these precious immortal values also .
for people committed to universal values , though , lying and vandalizing look hypocritical .
works of art are arranged for him in a scale of values , as for the aesthetic metaphysicians .
the complex cepstrum uses the complex logarithm function defined for complex values .
her trained instinct for human values led her inevitably to those who would appreciate her confidences and keep them .
kin canada , is a canadian non-profit service organization that promotes service , fellowship , positive values , and national pride .
chapter xii values our fathers required no volumes on the humanism of the bible .
he may or he may not know literary values , but he comes to have a peculiar sort of knowledge of the commercial possibilities of books .
beyond these basics , values like number of trunks larger than a prescribed value , the maximum girth of the largest trunk , and whatever seems appropriate for that particular tree grouping should be recorded .
) < /fld > , < cd > an equation in which the unknown quantities admit of an infinite number of values , or sets of values .
though the values vary widely between units , a typical analogue cassette might give 60 db , a cd almost 100 db .
however with short exposure times and dark areas the sensor gets very little information to calculate the pixel values with , so it has to do a lot of guesswork , which means noise .
if he perceives not the extent of his danger , he asks not the remedy , because he values it not ; -- and the same effect may follow , if he doubts either its efficacy , or the sincerity of him who offers it .
but he ’ s unpretentious and good-hearted , and his bridge is really excellent. ” nobody values unpretentiousness more highly than the incurably pretentious .
these functions can be extended to other values of the variables x1 , x2 , x3 by means of analytic continuation .
the image is conceptually wrapped ( or tiled ) and values are taken from the opposite edge or corner .
so , that would be a " rectangle " of 25 values in 25 different cells ( a1 , a2 , b1 , b2 , .
lippard suggests that the formal values of the image can be regarded separately from other meanings .
the republicans in the united states denounced hamilton , adams and even washington as friends of britain , as secret monarchists , and as enemies of the republican values that all true americans cherished .
he had seen the decline and fall of so many magnificent projects—over-capitalised , and ‘ boomed ’ up to highly speculative if not fictitious values , with flattering reports and favourable surveys , dwelling more upon the visions of the future than the facts of the present .
discuss the relative values of the two ; is there a tendency more and more toward having the state give the whole education ?
one of them acts as decoder of all 6 values .
to produce students who have resilience in the face of cultural challenges that are in conflict with islamic values .
e._ , have several syllabic values , and are also used ideagraphically , _i .
no leader can accomplish the work needed who does not go to the fight hot with indignation at the intellectual jugglery which has swamped the protective principle and weakened the country ’ s capacity for sound political thinking and its keenness for distinguishing moral values .
but it is of different values -- according to the color .
if successful , enculturation results in competence in the language , values and rituals of the culture .
this establishes the idea of new imperialism through the lens of the " british view of the world " by attempting to bring british values to foreign lands .
where t and t have values as in ( 33 ) , .24 = specific heat of chimney gases , w = weight of dry chimney gas per pound of coal .
the intersection of elizabeth avenue and high street , a few feet west of seventh street , is a business center for that part of the city , and values and traffic are materially greater in that vicinity than below third street .
the moral values which are revealed in fully developed personality are certainly as _real_ , as much a fact of the universe , as are the tides or the orbits of planets .
he does not congratulate himself on his wealth , nor upon the comforts he possesses and that he values so highly .
there are men endowed with the sense which gives appreciation of values and the knowledge of property to such an extent that they are artists in the manipulation of finances .
literature was expected to assist in defining values and pointing out the proper moral and intellectual direction .
thus , there succeeded to these disparate values , the precious metals , in the form of powder and ingots , subject to theft and the inconveniences of weighing .
all we can do is to note that the grisailles were intended to have values .
he declared ( and here we are in the very heart of nietzscheism ) that nothing but a total change in these conditions , a complete transvaluation of all values , would ever alter man and make him more worthy of his past .
then we were shown the great , thick-necked , black-headed jersey bull , and could scarcely believe our ears when told that he , his mother , and six brothers represented values amounting to about a hundred thousand dollars .
i 'm not sure about good ways to bound g in order to calculate higher values .
such values as independence , resourcefulness , and patriotism continue to be reflected in the international relations of the country , particularly in its relations with the soviet union .
i think a discussion of substrate kd vs inhibitor ki values might be useful too .
the arithmetic mean of the values of a ( strictly ) concave function in two distinct points is less than the value of the function in the arithmetic mean of the two points ( this is the " more words " version of the first inequality i wrote ) .
her distrust of nolan extended only to his abilities as a constructive builder of story-telling pictures and a judge of pictorial values .
it turns out that when you select the k largest singular values , and their corresponding singular vectors from u and v , you get the rank k approximation to x with the smallest error ( frobenius norm ) .
to convert analog video lines into a series of square pixels , the industry adopted a default sampling rate at which luma values were extracted into pixels .
the semi-synchronous oscillation of the southern ocean raises the magnitude of oceanic tides somewhat above these directly generated values .
but it amounts to a confiscation of land values by the state , which would be unjust to land-owners , however advantageous to the rest of the community .
the council also tied its support for the legislation to native fijian land rights and cultural values , which lacabuka said were based on christian principles .
the national government was involved in difficulties ; values were unsettled by the excessive emission of paper money .
it is this common reaction to the problems of the frontier which gives rise to the conclusion that this west branch valley environment was characterized by and that its inhabitants held values which turner evaluated as democratic .
=third= , moral values in pupil self-government , the high school period as a testing time , public schools and public health .
the primary mission of the community is to try to preserve traditional values , culture , language and lifestyles in the guidance of the kaienerekowa ( great law of peace ) .
also , unlike the egyptians , greeks , and romans , the babylonians had a true place-value system , where digits written in the left column represented larger values , much as in the decimal system .
all other merv values on each row do have minimum removal percentages for that row 's particle size .
these must be met , and therefore the field inspector must call particular attention to all matters specially affecting the values of the property he is inspecting .
his harmony is solid and correct , but hardly ever unconventional ; he prefers an authorized to a novel progression , values clearness above richness , and treats dissonances with the utmost circumspection .
in fact , the lowest values should be used to determine the worst-case scenario .
changing the range of values of λ changes the thickness of that line .
_grant of kingdom_ ( 1850 ) is strong in wisdom life , vitality of character , and historical values .
as lmdb is memory-mapped , it can return direct pointers to memory addresses of keys and values through its api , thereby avoiding unnecessary and expensive copying of memory .
you see , after spending five or six years in learning to value certain things , it 's rather a wrench to come here and find the values all distorted . ''
because adherence to tradition and egalitarianism are core values for us , and because members of our community have differing opinions about how these values should intersect .
uk needs a stronger national identity and promising to promote western values .
fred adams has investigated the existence of stars in universes with different values of the gravitational constant g , the fine-structure constant α , and a nuclear reaction rate parameter c .
the second answer is a combination of dictatorships spreading anti-western propaganda , traditional values , and religion .
in order to avoid recomputing hold-and-modify values and circumvent fringing , the programmer would have to ensure the left-most pixel of every blitter object and the left-most pixel of every line of a scrolling playfield is a ' set ' pixel .
but the experimental determination of the actual values of these constants presented formidable difficulties which were not surmounted till a later date .
even clang uses the same values .
the set consisted of 13 values , from 1 centime to 1 franc .
as part of independence in 1961 , the government established the kuwaiti dinar as its currency and reissued the 1959 stamps in the new values , also adding some new designs , for a total of 18 values , ranging from 1 fils to 3 dinars .
neither in their definitions nor in that of smith is involved the vulgar error which confounds as real capital things which are only relatively capital , such as evidences of debt , land values , etc .
dfff ) are not legal unicode values , and their utf-8 encoding should be treated as an invalid byte sequence .
personal values are unique to individuals and thus are not an appropriate basis for professional ethics .
[ sidenote : yes ; for experience has intrinsic inalienable values . ]
to needlessly fully-protect articles goes against the core values of this project .
internet , social media , and blogosphere as well as the top 75,000 print and electronic media and that the end result is a non-biased analytical tool that provides a gauge of relative values among various institutions , as well as measures of how that value changes over time .
_the texas appraisal._— `` railroad franchise values in texas . ''
ideally , the values for rf are equivalent to the r values used in column chromatography .
the book " brings together the values , thoughts and ideas of president kalam as reflected in his speeches and addresses .
using this method we find the values of the hide ( carucate , sulung ) to have been as follows , our figures standing for pounds and decimal fractions of a pound .
accordingly , one can view the other values of the character as " twisted " dimensions .
it 's seldom he values the things that are , what he craves he never may gain , but ever he tries , till the day he dies and then feels he has lived in vain .
god values not a natural might , nor an acute understanding , nor vouchsafes such perfections the glorious title of that of his image .
a logical system or , for short , logic , is a formal system together with a form of semantics , usually in the form of model-theoretic interpretation , which assigns truth values to sentences of the formal language , that is , formulae that contain no free variables .
given the large amount of platform parameters and the large number of values that these parameters can assume , the design space of advanced computer architectures is huge .
she is a nurse educator , nursing administrator , researcher and a registered nurse who values caring , as a fundamental core of the nursing profession .
their values pulled them one way , while cultural magnets pulled them in another .
( for the sake of completeness , a few factors whose values can not easily be computed may be mentioned .
yes , only position , mass and instantaneous speed are relevant , but you can work out those values for any other time given them at one time ( ignoring quantum effects , which we can safely do ) .
this includes basic war skills , military discipline , physical fitness , drill and ceremonies , air force core values and a comprehensive range of subjects relating to air force life .
rgb colours values are , respectively , 12-28-140 , 252-209-22 and 206-17-38 .
compounding the popular expectation that home prices do not fall , it is also widely believed that home values will yield average or better-than-average returns as investments .
sequential grids , as opposed to overlapping , are also published , with values in specific locations in grids needing to be transferred to others .
the surpluses have been spent on improvements , and railroad shares to-day represent actual values .
ann._ , 1895 , 54 , 655 ) , who found the limiting values of [ kappa ] to be 7.5 to 9.5 for iron , and 11.2 to 13.5 for steel , remaining constant up to h = .06 ; by p. culmann ( _elekt .
nor can we say that values -- religious or aesthetic -- are to be determined on the simple principle that the latest edition is the best .
also it is possible to construct lambda expressions for which there are multiple values .
where can we find a man who values character more highly than an irish protestant ?
we can plot the pairs of values which we measure and make a curve like that of fig .
the very concept of defining judaism as a people or a " civilization " suggests a wide variety of values within the context of judaism .
young was part of a " family values caucus " in the progressive conservative party , a group which was frequently marginalized by the mike harris government .
considering actual values with values before the war , the products which now form the substance of trade between european countries do not represent even the half of that before the war .
for integer values of ν , these may be expressed in terms of the euler polynomials .
studies are also made regarding the nature of the property and other issues that may affect value , including environmental assessment findings , timber values , etc .
there aren't any literary values until time has spoken .
early on in the show , she values her ' in-crowd ' status and experiences repeated friction with a friend over a boy ( as kelly did ) .
james childress and tom beauchamp in principle of biomedical ethics ( 1978 ) identify beneficence as one of the core values of healthcare ethics .
if you are looking for a friendly and enjoyable work environment that upholds true christian values then it would be in your best interest to look elsewhere .
how can spinoza 's position , his denial and repudiation of the moral values , be explained ?
hasan explains that she calls herself a " cowgirl " based on the cowboy values of appreciating the outdoors , oneself , and other people .
in this simple model it is assumed that the brain consists of interconnected components that may add , multiply and delay signal values .
secondly , communist propaganda sacrifices all other values to the propaganda .
when the sexual revolution questioned the values promoted in romance comics , along with the decline in comics in general , romance comics began their slow fade .
their united values totted up to a sum which caused mr. banneret to give a low whistle , accustomed as he had become to his personal liability for fabulous amounts lately .
as you the priest values it , so shall it be .
socially the snowdens professed conservative values , praising in their letters and music such concepts as women 's virtue , temperance , and piety .
every change of thought causes a change of pitch , but the degree and direction of change in pitch of the voice depends upon the degree and direction of change in thought values .
[ 207 ] values in gold .
c programmers will often use tagged unions , dispatching on tag values , to accomplish what ml accomplishes with datatypes and pattern matching .
these results in reference to the composition of water of course agree exactly with the facts obtained by the experiments described in the chapter on water , for it is because of those experiments that the values 1.008 and 16 are given to hydrogen and oxygen respectively .
on account of the doubtful value for the degree of ionization , the values in the table are marked ? , but the value found by richards and behr appears to be quite accurate .
based on its understanding of jewish sources and jewish values , it asserts that gay , lesbian , bisexual and transgender jews may fully participate in community life and achieve positions of professional and lay leadership .
radical traditionalism " refers to a worldview that stresses a return to traditional values of hard work , craftsmanship , local culture , tribal or clan orientation , and non-material values in response to a perceived excess of materialism , consumerism , technology , and societal homogeneity .
if he could have been persuaded to take on a neutral tint and keep himself well in the background , inanity might , in time , have assumed the dignity of intellectuality : but he lacked the sense of proportion , of values .
another definitive set in 1945 marked the end of the war ; the higher values of this were issued in small numbers , and are relatively expensive today .
he was a vocal and prominent proponent of traditional values and practices in the catholic church .
about 90 per cent of all the sennit hats and 80 per cent of the total importations had foreign values of less than $ 7 per dozen .
t values in order to determine the magnitude of the deceleration of the earth 's rotation .
these values should be taken with some caveats .
note that x is often a vector of measurements , in which case t ( x ) may be a function from the space of possible values of x to the real numbers .
in the most curious way she had captured the moral values of the situation .
four pieces were generally used for playing , and they were treated just like dice ; the best throw was that in which each of the astragals lay in a different position , and thus all values were represented , sometimes they counted according to the highest number thrown .
in figure 6 slope values expressed in degrees , per cent grade , feet per statute mile , and gradient are compared .
remember , all decibels are just a ratio between two values .
at the heart of each glows a unique cluster of precious jewels ; our myths and histories , our heritage , our values and social structure , our cosmology , and relationship to the ultimate .
an intensely nationalistic writer , muratsan was a nineteenth-century romantic in style and an advocate of traditional cultural and religious values .
i think stuff like this plays into the hands of our critics , and pisses over the values we were set up to promote .
in this position of light the values become `` close . ''
it was a non sequitur because i asked how spoilers are more important several other things , and you replied that some unspecified ' they ' can be dealt with in some unspecified manner that conflicts with some unspecified wikipedia values but not others .
in accordance with these authorities , in the pronunciation of japanese words the consonants are to be taken at their usual english values and the vowels at their values in italian or german .
even mr. wells is so dominated by this anti-social point of view that he falsifies both psychology and fact in his tirade upon the sane worker for human values .
the usual inflation of values followed , and subsequently the inevitable collapse , which almost amounted to national bankruptcy .
to little emma i am especially beholden , because she would yesterday have killed for my supper what she most values , her pigeons .
theoretically , the fuel values of woods are proportionate to their weights , except that resinous woods must be compared with resinous , and non-resinous with non-resinous .
thus , the ciliated rings of the two larvæ -- so similar in appearance -- are in reality structures of entirely different values , being in the one case parts of the velum , and in the other special developments of cilia behind the velum .
wages are stagnant , fuel prices are up at a record rate , food prices are up , and home values have plummeted .
the girls were instructed in the relative values of different woods as fuel .
she argues for public schools " common " to all citizens and " detached " from individual citizen or community values , and argues for a constitutional mandate to this end .
an ugly object is only relatively ugly ; and by entering into new relations with its environment may be raised to even higher rank in the aesthetic scale of values .
penalty ( 1960-1999 ) some values from the 1960 and 1995 revenue issues exist overprinted in greek , turkish and english for use as penalty stamps .
perhaps your father owns property in the neighborhood , and you could write on _how real estate values have changed in this neighborhood_ .
pastry , table of food values of , 179 .
this may be accomplished by considering the ratios of formants rather than their absolute values .
this table is made up of strands of the different metals of the same diameters and lengths , so as to obtain their relative values .
an introduction to the art of interior decoration interior decoration as a selling method 131 emotional values of light , color , line , and proportion 133 color management in decoration 139 principles of furniture arrangement 141 unit viii .
user selects values for f , the maximum acceptable false positive rate per layer and d , the minimum acceptable detection rate per layer .
higher and higher they went and to boost them still higher , as well as to substantiate the values , the bogy concerning insufficient moisture was drowned in the excessive rainfall .
china , a complex of 3,500 apartments designated as social housing in rizhao , shandong , was sold to local officials at prices 30-50 per cent below market values .
god does not enter into his calculations or determine his scale of values .
interpersonal relationships -- values .
even though the absolute number of tests was small , yet for the sake of giving a better general view , all values are given in percentages .
it was found that the incidental mortality exceeds critical values and therefore by-catch is a significant threat to the harbour porpoise .
it was started during the tenure of prime minister david ben-gurion , but was completed in june 1964 under prime minister levi eshkol , at a cost of about 420 million israeli lira ( at 1964 values ) .
given a surface , one may integrate over its scalar fields ( that is , functions which return scalars as values ) , and vector fields ( that is , functions which return vectors as values ) .
moreover , it destroys social values which _can_ be added up .
the given values are sorted by the partition coefficient .
corroded coins get higher market values than cleaned coins .
and the strongest motive in opposing this most obvious betterment is that so much wealth counted in new york is not wealth at all , but fictitious values depending solely on new york remaining new york .
christian and islamic values , hinsch , bret .
we now indicate subdivisions of three by modifying note values with dots or triplets .
for steel bars of various qualities j. bauschinger found for this limit values varying from 10 to 17 tons per square inch .
however the family fails to adapt and persists in their anti-social lifestyle which clashes with the values of the reserved upper class inhabitants of the neighbourhood , who try everything in their power to get rid of the flodders .
for the leading precious stones above named , the values are more nearly standard throughout the world than for any other minerals , with the exception of gold and possibly platinum .
there is the ultimate dilemma of the eugenist -- the dilemma which destroys forever the dream of a control of parenthood from the point of view of merely psychic values .
by september , 1908 , all values except the 10c , 15c and 20c had been exhausted and by the end of october these three values were sold out as well .
music is cruel , ravenous , selfish , overbearing with poetry ; it deprives it , for its own ends , of almost everything that makes it poetry , altering its verbal values , disregarding its rhymes , substituting another rhythm for that of the poet .
it is a commonplace among students of ethics that moral values grow , in greater or less degree , out of economic factors .
what higher values than life are there ?
what browning values is struggle .
separate values for each source are only given where one or more sources differ .
and the values in the mind of an individual constitute no self-complete and independent system , either in their origin , in their interactions , or in their consequences for action .
the ideal whig woman would help the patriotic cause from inside her separate sphere , engaging in domestic chores and preparing to educate the next generation according to the values espoused by the men who fought for independence .
but your quite mistaken view , on that occasion , arose from an incorrect estimate of values .
a differential equation is a mathematical equation for an unknown function of one or several variables that relates the values of the function itself and of its derivatives of various orders .
ambulocetus and gandakasia primarily ate terrestrial prey , while a combination of low oxygene isotope and high carbon isotope values suggests that himalayacetus consumed freshwater but ate marine prey , thus that it foraged in a marine environment but returned on land to drink .
he believes the government " should not impose its values upon marriage " but instead " should protect the rights of couples to engage in civil unions if they wish , as well as the rights of religious organizations to follow their beliefs .
the values of _ ( 1- [ theta ] ) v1 in ( 12 ) are exactly the same as those of ( [ theta ] ) v1 in ( 11 ) , but in the reverse order .
the table computations are based on all assessment class data from stub-class through fa-class on the scale , but only stub-class is shown with the computed values to avoid these limitations .
by restricting an integer variable to non-negative values only , one more bit can be used for storing the value of a number .
the most recent analyses of all the kinds of food usually consumed by the animals of the farm are fully stated ; and the nutritive values of those substances are in most instances given .
in creating appropriate knowledge , culture , attitudes and values , an organisation builds its capacity to survive the turbulence created by low frequency and high consequence risks .
the table is so large , that in the great majority of cases not only exact , but otherwise satisfactory values can be obtained by this method , without any interpolation whatever . ''
except for the two-dozen-odd mysterious interlopers , there wasn't a pistol in the fleming collection that was n't worth at least twenty dollars , and quite a few had values expressible in three figures .
it is in this garden that we learn the real values of things , and come to know the price at which our redemption was bought .
finally , stace lindsay ( 2000 ) claims the differences between development-prone and development-resistant nations is attributed to mental models ( which , like values , influence the decisions humans make ) .
this basis is now believed to have been fictitious , it being found that , had such an average of values been struck , a paper dollar would have become the equivalent to something much more like 60 cents gold .
he found nothing in it to sustain his values or his will to live , and he was unable to make the adjustment .
excess vitamin a , which is most common with high dose vitamin supplements , can cause birth defects and therefore should not exceed recommended daily values .
in fact , even a theremin designed for only the audio range will probably extend beyond the audio range , unknown to the designer of it , if the electrical values of the components used allow that .
do you believe it is appropriate for an administrator to impose their own ethical values when making administrative actions ( e .
after the invention of the telescope , measurements were made by observing occultations of stars by the moon , which allowed the derivation of more closely spaced and more accurate values for δt .
the cards are arranged in descending order for killing power , with point values listed by the side of each card .
she regained favour when the values from the cultural revolution were being reconsidered .
in contrast , digital chips only use and create voltages or currents at discrete levels , with no intermediate values .
he has also founded the sri vyaasa madhwa samshodhana pratishtaana trust , which focuses on enriching indian culture , tradition and values .
the unary notation can be abbreviated by introducing different symbols for certain new values .
it is evident that each grain will be cultivated in preference on the soils which are better adapted for it than for the other ; and , if the demand is supplied from these alone , the values of the two grains will have no reference to one another .
we find these derived values becoming independent , substantial , standing in their own right .
subtitled the story of the world today for the men and women of tomorrow , the paper epitomised mee 's values and reflected the editor 's twin faiths of christian ethics and the british empire .
table of market values , 282 .
they intended to create a society free of the values that had led them to be rejected when they were young .
old family ties , as traditional claims of status , are not found in the nouveaux riches , which challenges and ultimately redefines social traditions and values such as the institution of debutantes and their debut to society .
in pure functional programming , rather than assigning to local variables , these computed values form an invariable sequence , and prior values are accessed by self-reference ( later values in the sequence reference earlier values in the sequence to be computed ) .
moreover , they are relatively inexpert , as artists , in the knowledge of the technique and values of the spoken word .
the primary difference is that data cube elements are numerical values that are added during kube contraction ; program kube elements are transformations that are composed .
the reason is that an order that knowingly permits the death of soldiers to be brought about , even if the intentions were different , carries a black flag and is a flagrantly illegal order that undermines the most central values of our social norms .
the variations in the coinage are so numerous and uncertain , that to express the values of the solidus or sou , at the different periods and among the different races enumerated , is virtually impossible .
the first crime usually involves an abduction of any person or thing someone highly values .
these were technically valid for postage but due to their high values they never actually saw postal use so they are regarded by many as purely revenue stamps .
[ psi ] is the azimuth of the moon midway through the hour of observation , measured from the south point , positive values to the west , negative values to the east ( figure 17d ) .
social capital is a broad concept , usually focused on the values obtained by being part of a social network and thus , referred to as the sum of " social resources " ( lin , 2001 ) .
i was satisfied with the effect of things upon my senses , and cared nothing for their deeper values .
at this point , moreover , we are concerned with the intrinsic value immediately realized in the experience of art , not with further values that may result from it .
its purpose is to educate the public in the art , history , technology , and practice of building and flying kites and advance the joys and values of kiting in all nations .
he has no perception of proportions , no knowledge of values .
additionally , in some cases the value functions are assumed to be sigma additive ( the value of a whole is equal to the sum of the values of its parts ) .
his misplaced values of importance and popularity were shaken to the core by his declining ability to leverage those self-perceived traits successfully as he grew older .
all of damage values in impact section were switch from 2005 or 2006 to 2010 inflation .
when land values were inflated about the time of world war i , ade was a millionaire .
british political culture is tied closely with its institutions and civics , and a " subtle fusion of new and old values " .
the shadow is heavy ; the street is in demi , not total , obscurity ; the values of the flying ravens and the shadow are clearly enunciated .
general theory of absolute values .
his style has been pronounced akin to that of eugène carrière ; his sense of values on a par with goya 's and rembrandt 's ( that shop window of his in the durand-ruel collection is truly rembrandtesque ) .
therefore , no record is kept of the suits of the cards which have been played , but only of their values .
it is a very expensive spice in bangladesh , and it has lots of medicinal values , taste is like horse radish .
but this illegitimate use of the word 'will ' does not impair the force of the argument for absolute values .
an inhabited type ( as proper types are called in haskell ) is a type which has values .
no man values the best medicine , if administered by a physician , whose person he hates or despises .
a kinetic data structure allows the values stored in it to change continuously with time .
most values , i.e. , my present social status , my hopes of the future , and memory of the past , are personal and not values that can be exchanged .
in grey component replacement ( gcr ) , contrary to under color removal ( ucr ) , the cmy values that add to grey all along the tone scale can be replaced with black ink .
also , the factorial function can be extended so that it has values on ( almost ) all real ( and even complex ) numbers , and that function can then certainly be differentiated .
if someone else is autoconfirmed there , note that and seem to work in the same way as on english wikipedia , with the same english-language parameter names and values .
two medium stripes in different red values enclose the second border , which carries the s device in lavender and blue on black .
the business man who values indirect agents above the market rate borrows , and if he miscalculates and fails to make them earn the expected rent , he loses .
these spectral reflectances are themselves ratios of the reflected over the incoming radiation in each spectral band individually , hence they take on values between 0 .
the singular values can accumulate only at zero .
he values this accumulation at three millions .
along with a sensitive appreciation of the achievements and values of the past , goes , in the impartial critic , an acknowledgment of its limitations .
the council 's criticism of islamarzu toker stated in an interview that she considers sharia , islamic law , as unacceptable and contradicting to both human rights and the values of the german constitution .
coin values can be modeled by a set of distinct positive integer values ( whole numbers ) , arranged in increasing order as through .
healers tend to be flexible , unless one of their values are violated .
-- valuation and rating act. -- decline in land values .
apart from the computations on the opinion values themselves , subjective logic operators also take into account the attributes , i .
just as we have all borne witness to these horrific acts , we have watched in awe your acts of courage , now an abiding emblem of canadian strength , values and valour .
he 's rationalized , built up a defense which he 's structured with his idealism , foundationed with old era values .
mainstream economics uses instantaneous values in much of its analysis for reasons of mathematical tractability .
clough , shepard b. , _basic values of western civilization_ , n.y. : columbia university press , 1960 .
probably most readers of poetry have already considered these two phrases , and those who have , i feel sure , will agree that they are useful in making for a clearer understanding in our estimation of values .
taking the minus and plus values of all the islands here measured , the average rate of the advance of the mangrove-margins during this half-century may be placed at about 250 yards in the case of these reef-islands , which would amount to a mile in 400 years .
since the beginning of time , it is only the moral values that have endured .
this distribution of wealth is a key component of the potlatch gift-giving festival , and was encouraged through the display of values celebrated in the culture such as generosity , humility and respect .
when using an integer representation of a truth table , the output value of the lut can be obtained by calculating a bit index k based on the input values of the lut , in which case the lut 's output value is the kth bit of the integer .
each year , government agencies , non-governmental organizations , and groups of citizens at all levels of the community have acted to raise public awareness of wetland values and benefits in general and the ramsar convention in particular .
it depicts the superstitious beliefs of the people , folk culture , and human values in the background of a natural calamity .
despite the decline in burials from an already low level , rising land values in the post war years meant that the lnc was a valuable and successful company .
gold and silver values are unsteady and capricious ; intrigues can overthrow them ; markets can be glutted , and mines fail .
i wish , however , to allude more particularly just here to one of the `` evidences '' which mrs. ann leah underhill apparently values most highly in connection with the claim of inherent and hereditary `` mediumistic '' powers residing in certain individuals and families .
along with this change in farm values goes the increase or decrease in the number of tenant farmers and the shifting of the ownership of land to farm landlords .
subsequent astronomers , such as al-bīrūnī , used similar values .
earnestly concerned with social issues and moral values , it is puritanical poetry in which aesthetic considerations are secondary .
ka values which are close in value .
business revived , values increased .
if these values are not immediately used , they are lost .
it takes as input either real values with inherent inaccuracy or noise ( which can be unknown ) , or a real value with apriori defined uncertainty , or an interval .
taking them in the lump , at values varying from a thousand each to fancy figures , perhaps fifty thousand pounds' worth . ''
hence the unevenness of his work , the different values of this or that poem .
no one , i 'm sure , will undertake the office , who values his own ease , and quiet , and comfort , at a higher rate than the being of use to his neighbours and the public . ''
[ illustration : the knot-garden , new place , stratford-upon-avon ] shakespeare very nearly follows bacon 's order of perfume values in his selection of flowers to adorn the beautiful spot in the wood where _titania_ sleeps .
these values are inconsistent with tribimaximal neutrino mixing ( i .
these values , taken in connection with the robeson channel disturbance , indicate that the time of tide along the coast of peary land becomes later as one travels eastward from cape bryant .
then that happened which altered all the values .
food values are not measured by the pleasure afforded the palate .
the traditional values of the times are experienced by the main character and are enhanced by her surroundings .
stands to reason values ca n't always increase , and immigrants ca n't always come in .
if we have dollars of differing values , only the poorest will circulate .
much discussion and ink have been devoted to trying to define what risk may be taken in such matters , that is in reality how far values may be assumed to penetrate into the unbroken ore .
nor can it be denied that this gives pleasure , but the pleasure is only such as is conveyed by tactile values .
why was he not at the elbows of his rich customers , persuading them , telling them stories , explaining values , demonstrating , cajoling ?
phi values were found to vary considerably with the location of the mutation , with some regions of the protein yielding values near 0 and others yielding values near 1 .
a people that can so consecrate a place of natural beauty is a people of fine feeling for the essential values of life .
the artist 's contact with the world , in his capacity as artist , is one of feeling ; he values life , not for its material rewards and satisfactions , but for what it brings to him of emotional experience .
postage " for the 2- and 5-cent values , but " h .
while daily expecting to hear from the police-authorities , we occupied all the time we could in straightening up church records and accounts of church books received from and sent to different places , which was somewhat difficult as we had to estimate values in different kinds of money .
each player adds up the point values of the cards they have left , and then adds this total value to their previous cumulative score .
used to extract raw values from a sparql endpoint , the results are returned in a table format .
they had heard from the servant-girl about what the young gentleman from the sunday earth had said , and they were mollified by his proper appreciation of values .
higher values are generally found in the mandible than the maxilla .
both easements were designed to assist the county 's efforts to protect and maintain `` the scenic , historic , and recreational values of land within the county . ''
this partition of the sum of squares holds for instance when the model values ƒi have been obtained by linear regression .
there is a potential conflict between the values espoused in the above cited cases and the limitations set forward in article 29 of the united nations convention on the rights of the child , which is below described .
`` if you valued things as the world values them , i should not care to put the question ; but i fear you may have some lingering notion that , though god 's way is the true way , the world 's way must not be disregarded .
its nutritive value is great , and since every pfennig and heller had to buy a maximum in food values the demand for prunes soon exceeded greatly the supply -- so everybody thought .
over time a merger of the values of the nurse and of the existing community would be reflected as moreness in each .
business would be disorganized , values would be uncertain ; nobody would know that the paper in his pocket to-day would buy a dinner to-morrow .
they do not march in indian file ; nor are they to be set one against another in a comparison of values .
another such manifesto was arrigo boito 's poem dualismo ( dualism ) , which challenged common values and sense of decency by espousing a decadent take on art , inspired mainly by baudelaire and poe .
mission statements , goals , objectives , standards of practice , policies and procedures emerge from assumptions , beliefs , and values that emphasize one 's humanness .
the term " character type " is normally used even for types whose values more precisely represent code units , for example a utf-16 code unit as in java and javascript .
chemobot works with an index with revids of pages where certain values are correct .
in soldering , a thermal profile is the set of time-temperature values for a variety of processes such as slope , thermal soak , reflow , and peak .
lindelöf theorem to show that initial values for x and v are enough to guarantee a unique solution .
the gold and silver values do not pass into solution under ordinary working conditions , and the addition of a small quantity of common-salt or of hydrochloric acid to the vat effectually prevents any silver from remaining in solution in the liquors .
the term " projection " here refers to any function defined on the earth 's surface and with values on the plane , and not necessarily a geometric projection .
the value of the money , on the one hand , and the values of the goods on the other hand , are both to be explained as complex social psychological forces .
this trait antagonizes social progress , but it is preserved because of secondary values which it represents , such as moral or æsthetic values .
the inconsistency can range from simple blending of ( apparently ) contradictory attitudes and values to ( occasionally ) outright hypocrisy .
for it , salvation will be no magical hocus-pocus external to the reach and timbre of man 's personality : it will be his loyal and intelligent union with those values and possibilities of life which have come within his ken .
values above about 500 pixels per line are enough for conventional broadcast television ; dvb-t , dvd and dv allow better values such as 704 or 720 .
a new school board elected in 2005 criticized the international baccalaureate on the grounds that it was un-american and did not promote judeo-christian values .
that a man values a dollar more than he does her wish is an insult to the sensitive woman .
lymecycline , unlike tetracycline hydrochloride , is soluble at all physiological ph values .
although , therefore , the relative values of positions was not always recognized , great britain obtained as a legacy from sailing days a large number of harbours admirably adapted for use as coaling stations .
the rationale for excluding gays and lesbians from serving in the military is often rooted in cultural norms and values and changed overtime .
the conception of social value as an _average_ of individual values is withdrawn in the second treatment , and no substitute is offered for it .
compensatory values can be defined as part of a pair of values where a change in one value can be compensated by a change in the other value .
two values were issued every year from 1939 until 1973 , with the exception of 1955 , 1956 , 1969 , and 1971 when there were three values .
it is wholesome to apply the principle of relative values to the bible , since one can not fully appreciate the best without recognizing that which is inferior .
and janet had ranked far higher than a trifle in m. st. hilaire ’ s european scale of values , at least since her departure from brussels .
i turned as well as i could , to find the lovely lines , now lost in general shapes and values , blurred into masses .
she self-identifies as a filipina ; her family have adapted to filipino culture and values since they moved to cebu when she was six years old .
chapter 57 future trend of values § i .
josé giovanni defended right-wing values , the family , law and order and tougher punishment but was a staunch opponent of the death penalty .
all these values are empirical and conditioned .
claiming culture , it is the crudest ; asseverating its pre-eminence , it is the basest ; denying all outside values and virtue , it is the narrowest .
the ultimate benefit which veterans receive from the loan guarantee provisions of the servicemen 's readjustment act depends largely on the success of our stabilization program in restraining building costs and real estate values .
for all criteria a threshold value is defined in order to avoid distorted values .
the members of a type are the values of that type .
the values of static variables are the same across all members of the same class .
the politically incorrect guide to islam , a book about the history and tenets of islam which identifies the rise of islamic fundamentalism as the greatest danger to western values since the end of the cold war .
citizens united decision push specific candidates , values or policy positions .
solubility values of organic acids , bases , and ampholytes of pharmaceutical interest may be obtained by a proceess called " chasing equilibrium solubility " .
it makes a definite attempt , however , to get away from oswald as a specific character and to discuss the problem of disillusionment in the peacetime military or disillusionment with values on a much more universalized range than exhibit no .
decimal representations are rounded or padded to 10 places if the values are known .
these values , from the most positive to the most vague , call to one another and give answer , like echo and voice .
for example , lets have 10 values of x which are 1 .
it is consistent with 2-neutrino oscillation and a fit provides the values for the δm2 and θ parameters .
hence for hypothesis testing , small values of n use the t-test and larger values of n use the z-test .
canada rejected reciprocity now for precisely the same reason that uncle sam had rejected reciprocity ten years before -- because uncle sam had no quid pro quo , no equivalent in values to offer , which canada wanted badly enough to make trade concessions .
nurturing manjusrians who are anchored in values whilst global in perspective .
news values are not universal and can vary widely between different cultures .
incidentally he remarks at this point in his memoir , [ 45 ] in speaking of works on celestial mechanics , that “ after excellent analytical solutions , values of the quantities involved are introduced on the basis apparently of the respect due to age .
if there was a vast development of production there was also a huge destruction of values .
many critics praised her songwriting and production values with some highlighting the intros and singles .
when we pass beyond the simple case of a consumption good , and get into the realm of the more institutional economic values , we lose all guidance from the clue of satisfactions in consumption .
in like manner , true values are facts , and , on the other hand , facts without the determination of value and of universality dissolve again into pure phenomena .
the patriarchal society with a strong warrior tradition values the birth of boys .
if the ion concentration is buffered by the cell by chelation or removal to subcellular compartments , the measured rate of uptake will give only minimum values of km and vmax .
all the values shew variations in the marks on the back hair and in the curls .
`` i consider an article is increased in value by passing through several processes of manufacture ; but , in exchange , do two equal values cease to be equal because the one comes from the plough and the other from the power-loom ? ''
his method for determining approximate values of the roots of equations is far in advance of the hindu method as applied by cardan , and is identical in principle with the methods of sir isaac newton and w. g. horner .
i suppose it might still be possible to find out those values .
in general quantum field theories , even if the classical potential energy is minimized over a large set of possible expectation values , generically once quantum corrections are included nearly all of these configurations cease to minimize the energy .
'art values . '
the values of insolation are shown by the vertical distance above the plane of the two margins .
though his contributions are sometimes a little rash , he has been slowly learning the values of the community and , i think today after weeks of hints , we have gotten partially through to him , and unlike his previous offenses , is not pushing pov rampantly anymore .
but here appearance and prejudice are against one ( moral values are only apparent values compared with those which are physiological ) .
in great britain , in 1838 , the number of testamentary alienations of property taxed stood to those in which there was no will , in the proportion of 8:3 ; and the values of the alienated property as 10:1 .
data acquisition is the process of sampling signals that measure real world physical conditions and converting the resulting samples into digital numeric values that can be manipulated by a computer .
exceptions may arise when two solutions coalesce , or when infinite values of the variables occur .
at this moment a schoolmate , not much older than philip , but his faded cap displaying a far more advanced stage of sophistication , passed by , bestowing a sour look upon the object of this public debasement of the masculine values of doomington school .
the teacher asks them to observe their graphs carefully and list down the ( approximate ) values of the angles , made with time axis , by the tangents to their graphs , at the beginning and towards the end of their observations .
in the file , the user needed to supply variables and values which are still used in inno setup today .
because it comes from a french word that simply means " blue " , a wide range of colour values is used in the depiction of azure in armory and flags .
at the same time sophism was beginning to question traditional values and religious beliefs .
the program also offers the possibility to follow historic records with annually changing input values ( e .
all this amounts to a huge impoverishment of life , a loss of beauty and discrimination of rich and subtle values .
for what is mediocre can neither be exalted nor charmed by values drawn from mediocrity , and is constantly in need of values drawn from super-mediocrity , for its joy , for its love of life , and for its reconciliation with drabby reality .
mr. noyes 's picture of tolstoy the man adds nothing to aylmer maude 's exhaustive volumes ; and he values too seriously and literally a great deal of tolstoy 's detailed religious writing .
appropriate limits on substantive due process come not from drawing arbitrary lines , but from careful " respect for the teachings of history [ and ] solid recognition of the basic values that underlie our society .
through traditional rites including bridge-treading rite , a tug of war and catherine wheel game , festival participants learn korea 's cooperative values and have fun .
these negative manifestations of values and value inversions demonstrate how the philosophical conception of ressentiment rests upon qualitatively different grounds transcending science and pure economics .
he values one old invention , that is lost and never to be recovered , before all the new ones in the world , though never so useful .
mathematically the interaction radius shows up in the interaction part of the lagrangian as a coupling of field values at different points in space .
sometimes , the erm solution reveals that two alternatives have the same result or too close values , meaning that they are equally eligible ; naturally , this put the dm in a difficult position because he has to choose one of the two .
a scout respects and develops spiritual and cultural values .
it is an estimate of educational values .
as sen observed , this estimator is the value that makes the kendall tau rank correlation coefficient comparing the values of with the residual for the i-th observation become approximately zero .
some older cd drives would only see the second session erroneous values ( such as time and track type ) and were not able to copy or play these .
a connexion with the circular functions , however , appears later when the definition of log x is extended to complex values of x .
in modern times , the resident population is diverse due to the property values and other factors attracting asian and other international investors .
the values of the characters ' attributes increases as the characters gain experience through successive battles .
inasmuch as density of population determines land values , it follows that vacant land near a large city at $ 100 per acre may be cheaper than similar land at a distance would be at $ 10 per acre .
it is apparent that virtues have differing values in the confucian and christian systems .
based on the values mentioned above , it has been inferred that the water quality of the lake has deteriorated .
dictionaries ( class dict ) are mutable mappings tying keys and corresponding values .
the waveform amplitude values are stored in a buffer memory , which is stored in a phase generator .
from the approval of use for the spinnaker ( 1970 ) , to the 720 rule ( 1974 nationals ) to the addition of the silver chevron regatta ( 1976 ) , the class continues to promote good sailing values for all of its member fleets .
then the purchase bonds were distributed to the individuals pro rata to these values .
it is opposed to hypocrisy , that unworthy display of human character , in which a man disguises his real sentiments , and , on the contrary , professes principles which he neither feels nor values , merely for the purpose of promoting his selfish interests .
a practice that serves the consolidation and integration of good musical values is the space created after the 90s .
the distribution of these relative values , however , is not uniform for all four rhythmical forms , but falls into two separate types in dependence on the position of the accents as initial or final , following the discrimination already made .
there are a couple of good reasons for specifying these values , and in these units .
he who does not recognize them has no sense of values .
with the measure of values ?
this in essence will address the core values of democracy and work towards promoting social , cultural and economic progress .
a scout appreciates and develops spiritual and cultural values .
there was an accumulated difference of some fifteen thousand dollars in ore values between us and the smelter people , and i was obliged to stay on with barrett and help wrangle for our side in the discrepancy dispute .
i would not be willing to change any comments i make , unless it was against policy or my moral values .
all political parties were ordered to dissolve into the imperial rule assistance association , forming a single-party state based on totalitarian values .
in fact , the column of calculated values of the friction might have been computed from the former , without appreciably differing from what is found in the table .
the structure s contains all four values , and all four fields may be changed independently .
its educational value to the organization is important because it can provide industry- and organization-specific insights into such aspects as culture , values and the way strategy would have altered over time alongside a changing market place .
crest of the republic of singapore navy the emblem contains the national coat of arms , and below it an anchor which epitomises naval roots and signifies continued adherence to naval values .
also , any objects carried out of the level exits give different score values , or in the case of the heart object , an extra life .
the free white population of the south was a little more than eight and a quarter millions , and our total of assessed values was $ 5,465,808,000 : being six hundred and sixty ( $ 660 ) dollars to each soul ; nearly double the wealth of the north .
all values and all ideals in life ; all norms and obligations were thrown to the winds .
the terms expressing the relative values of the columns of attack always are placed at the left ; those for the columns of support in the center , and those for the columns of manoeuvre at the right .
instead , planning policy in specific parks should be based on the values , traditions and classification of each park .
of course , the 12 is the total number of values , and the 4 is the number of labels .
even the revolutionary war was not sufficient to teach _john bull_ , that his descendants had improved by transplantation , in all those qualities for which _stuffy john_ most values himself .
from 1930 till 1939 , weatherhead was a member of dr frank buchman 's oxford group and wrote several books reflecting the group 's values , including discipleship and the will of god .
though it can be implemented more efficiently using modular exponentiation , when large values of m are involved this is most efficiently computed with the montgomery reduction method .
joão gilberto has long had a reputation as an eccentric artist who values his privacy .
the definition of religion which he forms from his instruction should be broad enough to include these values and such others of similar kind as christianity at its best demands .
she also lives in china and represents traditional chinese values .
christian hardcore is a subgenre of hardcore punk primarily distinguished by its lyrical focus on christian themes and values , although former burden of a day guitarist bryan honhart has suggested that the genre also possesses sonic distinctions .
except in time of war , when governments insist that their citizens take part in mass violence , the absolute pacifist is apt to serve these other values , which he shares with many non-pacifists , without attracting the attention which distinguishes him from other men of goodwill .
it allowed for extreme subjectivity : in the absence of dialogue and of the influence of criticism through dialogue , the past was continuously reinvented according to goals and values of the writer 's present .
tork ) reclines on a giant cushion in eastern garb and , to the lilting backing of sitar and tabla , performs " i prithee ( do not ask for love ) , " a gentle number concerning spiritual values .
maplebrook 's goal is to create a community which values the individual , nourishes trust and confidence , promotes respect and understanding , encourages participation and helps build character .
these expected values are found using an integral , for the continuous variables being considered here .
if , say , group a were more inclined to extreme values ( the alternative hypothesis h1 ) , then there will be a higher proportion of observations from group a with low or high values , and a reduced proportion of values at the center .
in narrowing the possibility of substitution of goods by trade , the sum of values of goods for most men is diminished .
he much values it .
its interior has received quite as much study as has its exterior architectural values .
the human body is a much more varied and complex machine than any ever devised by man ; personal peculiarities , as well as fuel values , influence very largely the diet of an individual .
a new design was therefore prepared for these values with the inscription `` india postage and revenue . ''
and their dissimilarities are the measure of their complementary and supplementary values .
however if the pentacene is preoxidized , and the thus formed pentacene-quinone is used as the gate insulator , then the mobility can approach the rubrene values .
the values on which i live my life are islamic and not arab .
there is chapter 13 , for example , on ‘ institutional garden thrift. ’ there is an interesting discussion of coöperatives ; and another of taxation of land values .
the memorandum regarding founding the prize " valeriu boboc " for the liberty of press and defending of democratic values was adopted on april 30 , 2010 by the permanent bureau of the romanian senate .
in endeavoring to connect the specific values of these properties with individual mineral species , the chemical composition and the manner of occurrence are not to be forgotten .
spring injurious and beneficial insects and birds : identification of noxious insects and observations thereon ; study of representatives of common families of birds , as thrushes , warblers , sparrows ; economic values of birds .
they are all based on scientific analysis of food values , and follow strictly physicians ’ instructions .
the moral values are _there_ , so to speak , palpably , tangibly ; and the individual has only to use his mind enough to notice them .
and they try to redirect clients ' values in a way that will support the personal growth of each person .
we have established values for these services as wet-nurse , nurse-maid , governess , doctor and teacher , but who can estimate a woman 's value in giving a child a good heritage ?
suppose , for example , that you have now a total budget of 900 million pounds , and that , in the course of time , all values are expressed at half the present currency figure .
the important contribution of the pell family during a period approaching 150 years has been an appreciation of historical values and a sense of responsibility towards them .
the saturnians boast that they have no paupers , no thieves , none of those fictitious values called money , -- all which things , they hear , are known in that small saturn nearer the sun than the great planet which is their dwelling-place .
brightness in which surfaces of worn floor , slivered wall , dusty glass , showed values more specific than those of colour .
even a sunset sky can be shown in grays , so that we will think of the lovely colors that the grays , or values , express .
inline-block and inline-table values of css 2 .
in 2006 , jusuf kalla , the vice-president of indonesia , linked asian values with the proposed east asian free trade agreement and the east asian community arising from the east asia summit .
house , inc. ( pwh ) neihardt , john g. poetic values .
bret values range from 2 bret for a dental x-ray to around 400 for a barium enema study .
to print actual values such as the name property ( one of about six properties automatically defined by the compiler ) it is necessary to specify it through the print command , by specifying the name of the object and the property , separated by the dot ( .
he obtained the values of the efficiency f´t over a finite range from t to 0° c. , by adding up the values of f´t for the separate degrees .
us mint and prices and values for canadian coins .
full-scale development of oil reserves on the alaskan continental shelf would generate economic values on the order of ten billion dollars per year .
the landlady was acquitted and ctc lost the unusually large amount of money it had allotted to the case , which had been considered at the root of cyclists ' rights and the values of ctc .
the values provided in the question are the resistances and the voltages 5 and -5 .
in equilibrium at last -- with our bodily and atmospheric temperatures finally constant at their present values , which seem as low to you as yours appear high to us .
a man might be in the presence of untold wealth , but if he had not the consciousness to know and realize values , he would remain poor , even though by a wave of his hand he might command millions .
the give and take of thought had by a swift transformation of values come by something more than its own .
after nine months of war , we have arrived at no clear notion , even with regard to their relative values as soldiers in the field .
german historians , he declares , have lost all eye for the values of culture ; in fact , they have put this power of vision under the ban of the empire .
poor acting and production values have made the film a cult classic .
but the dollar , and the silver pieces regarded as fractions of a dollar , had no less than five different values .
most people have a negative opinion of slumlords , blaming them for declining property values and whole neighborhoods of shanty buildings .
such an analysis follows marx 's theories about the contradiction between use values and exchange values .
before you place your fingers on the keyboard you should have formed your ideal mental conception of the proper rhythm , the proper tonal quality , the æsthetic values and the harmonic content .
in particular , the threads of a process share its instructions ( executable code ) and its context ( the values of its variables at any given moment ) .
staying true to the popular values that define us , family comes first and a family is defined as the relationship between a man and a woman .
she values memory , fantasy and dreaming , along with aztec and nahua cosmology .
at 65 persons per mile ( the approximate mean of the three values cited above ) the population would be 12,350 , or , let us say an even 12,000 .
thus the values of the pressures _p_ and _p_↓ { 1 } in the diagram correspond to the value of the volume _v_ .
in the days of montezuma such was the value of the cacao seeds or beans that they took the place of money or small change in adjusting purchases , and they are recognized even today among the indians in representation of values .
`` _ a sinner throws away treasures ; a saint values the very smallest .
coins , foreign : list of , showing comparative values , 145–147 .
within the vast store of afghan folktales covering religion , history and moral values , many reinforce the values governing male and female behavior .
var values mean , the loads are not purely reactive--they have resistive components .
because one of the deepest values of our country is compassion , we must never turn away from any citizen who feels isolated from the opportunities of america .
and the values for ν implied in the actual color correction are not immaterial in computing the best form for a proposed objective .
nw8 have ceased to represent everything that is wrong with cricket , and instead have become a touchstone for those whose greatest fear is the erosion of the game 's traditional values .
the demand is great , the supply exceeding small , hence the continuous growth in values .
what values were used in the moonlight picture on page 10 ?
`` tell her , '' i continued presently , `` that if she values her liberty or her honour , if she cares for john polperro , to be on the leads to-night at midnight .
the one element of private ownership which the single tax system would exclude ; namely , the power to take rent from and profit by the changes in land values , finds no place among the advantages of private ownership enumerated in the encyclical .
all the values of the temperate landscape were reversed : the noon high-lights were whiter but the shadows had unimagined colour .
this , of course , can not provide a satisfactory solution to the problem , for no new life with new values is presented to us .
now , the parcel-post charges in the united kingdom are considerably lower than the express charges in the united states not only absolutely , but also relatively to the different values of money in the two countries .
do not contradict me , dear aunt ; fernand still lives ; if not , then the duke has broken faith , and i know he values too highly the virtues of his race to disgrace them .
for example , pds would be convenient for representing the field values of objects that are being constructed from external data , in a part of the system where the semantic checks and interpretations needed for valid objects have not yet been applied .
skits highlighting their moral values are organised by children .
although the new asa values can be used with all previous model g-e meters , interchangeable calculator-hoods with asa exposure indexes are available for types dw-48 , dw-49 , and dw-58 meters .
i can not refrain from mentioning still another masterpiece , this time not only of movement , but of tactile values and personal beauty as well -- pollaiuolo 's `` david '' at berlin .
the image model remains harmonic for an infinity of values of importance , given to the elements or relations .
the forms of composition in verse and prose which are practised in each language are further organizations of words , and have formal values .
in that case , there is again no formal proof of any necessary relationship between values and prices , and marx 's manuscript really seems an endless , pointless theoretical detour leading nowhere .
they argue that decision theory should be extended so as to allow infinite expectation values in some situations .
in accordance with these last provisions however , there were issued two additional values .
three such plates will be furnished with each polariscope , which have `` sugar values '' respectively approximating 80° , 90° , and 100° .
at that time , president jackson 's attitude toward the united states bank so seriously affected values that wheat declined from $ 1.50 to 50 cents and virginia farm land to less than one-third of its former price .
the greenhouse is protected by the law for its architectural values .
her schoolhouses are too far apart , even in this rich section , and she values a fast trotter or racer more than she does a fine scholar .
a list builder , is a graphical control element in which a user can select a set of text values by moving values between two list boxes , one representing selected values and the other representing unselected ones .
to further heighten the distinction , the post office now introduced the oak-leaf frame for the franklin stamps , thus eliminating olive branches from the higher values along with washington .
express the fact of relief in terms of _m_ and you have the correlative fact in -_m_ implied in the very definition of _m_ ; while if you express _x_ in terms of _y_ , you have _y_ values , and nothing but _y_ .
the landscape painter opposes the whole sky to the whole ground ; he wants a vibration of color in each , without disturbing the values ; the designer in stained glass sometimes desires to fill a space with iridescent color , perhaps as a background for figures .
founded as a strategic partner of music has no enemies , content-os designs and manages projects at every scale that strengthens the core values of its partners through music and other forms of media .
a variety of tools have been developed for practitioners to use with clients including card games which enable clients to explore their strengths and values and so build the confidence which is necessary to begin the process of change .
edward hincks of killyleagh , county down , ireland , whose keen criticisms of lassen 's work , and original contributions to the definite settlement of syllabic values , may be regarded as closing the period of decipherment of persian cuneiform writing .
in boston after the adjournment of the legislature , however bitter the feeling of the men who had sold themselves , and those others who had lost their all in the crash of stock values that had followed whitney's defeat , their own complicity enforced silence and prevented outcry .
he makes the primitive fisherman and the primitive hunter straightway exchange their fish and game as owners of commodities , in proportion to the labor-time embodied in these exchange values .
old values shifted .
as the game develops , the relative values of the pieces will also change .
the number of distinct values representable in a single word on a 16-bit processor , such as the original x86 processors .
the foundation 's programs reflected these interests and values .
now , as the values of perception are those we call aesthetic , and there could be no beauty if there was no conception of independent objects , we may expect to find beauty derived mainly from the pleasures of sight .
although arthur at first holds to high ideals ( he values " literature " over journalism , sacrificial literary types over opportunists ) , he gradually moves away from them because he wants to be a somebody .
[ sidenote : æsthetic values everywhere interfused . ]
after the auditions , only 30 girls will be selected to go to the boot camp for eight weeks , where they will be trained on cultural values , public speaking and the environment .
in the country where things are grown , there is little opportunity for acquiring a sense of money values .
these stamps were in values of gold currency and inscribed " a m " for αξία μεταλλική ( " axia metalliki " or " value in metal " ) .
every correspondent should recognize such differences in news values , for papers pay , not according to the amount of copy they receive , but according to the amount they publish .
when they are to be gotten in the low key that the light behind necessitates , and with the close values which this implies , the difficulty is enormously increased .
governor kean 's speech at the monument 's dedication sought to " resist the skepticism about america 's place in the world , " as he proclaimed that the monument affirmed his " american heritage " and caused him to feel " deep pride in his american values .
[ 663 ] in short , values created by interstate commerce _are_ taxed .
european values and other topics were discussed in the intellectual 's forum .
one sees a remarkable reassortment of values .
the published figures , therefore , constitute a table of comparative commercial values as determined by the most expert knowledge .
the over-riding set of values is consumer oriented .
i , upon the other hand , am like some lover who values most an older picture of the woman he adores .
ccf , and custom linecolor values are ignored if shortsummary is undefined .
by advertising the exceptional merits of the copper industry and the financial power of the men who were backing it , the public would become educated to a knowledge of the values of `` coppers . ''
but the ore values were not high enough for exploitation .
however , two years later marcus reverted to the previous values because of the military crises facing the empire .
usually the values that insurance adjusters receive are either left-truncated , right-censored or both .
if in each case he values his chance at its right proportion ( and acts accordingly ) he will in the course of his life neither gain nor lose .
the ph regions in which the species exist overlap extensively since the difference between successive pka values is small .
prices were also influenced by the drop in lamb values , and daily declines were the rule .
depending on the operating systems of remote peers , the initial ttl values of a response packet can be set to different values .
once the concept is established , the nominal values of the various dimensions and design parameters need to be set , the detail design phase of conventional engineering .
and when , at last , values had so shrunk that it looked to jarrocks as if they could not shrink any more , he told her that her account -- which stood in the name of g. g. 's mother -- was worth nearly four hundred thousand dollars .
for owners , believing that land values must ultimately advance , hold on as long as they can .
and after all , it is intelligence and culture that count most in the fixing of final values .
the main values of the party - freedom , solidarity , tolerance , private property protection and responsibility .
wfte 's programming is " dedicated to the progressive values of social justice , economic justice , human rights , multiculturalism , environmentalism , freedom of expression , and democracy .
the park is now has a variety of vegetation types varying according to topography and other ecological values .
the values x and y are independent of each other , and therefore can be processed on separate cores at the same time ( rather than waiting in queue for one core ) .
my old values had been shipwrecked and i myself thrown overboard to sink or swim . ''
but this is only one of three values which y may have .
he states that they do not need to have the virtues of justice or moderation , as they are not important like the aforementioned values .
the impress of a developed curriculum , connected with an active trade experience , that is , a trade in which the children are at work , like the curriculum of a continuation school , is greater than the curriculum which has been evolved for its abstract cultural values .
these experiments , moreover , allow the numerical results of the calculation to be compared with the values measured .
the four main objects of criticism , then , are the moral question , the evil of athleticism , the false scale of values that is inculcated at a public school , and the subsequent conspiracy of silence .
the study shows how the values and attitudes of an increasingly aged society change , what kind of lifestyle it cultivates and what makes the " gold generation " happy .
of the `` domain of the argument '' ; ( 2 ) a rule for assigning the value or values of the function that correspond to any point in this domain .
however , empirical testing may find better values for k .
the values assigned to h were calculated from h = 2ni/r , and ranged from 3.9 to 585 , but inasmuch as no account was taken of any demagnetizing action which might be due to the two transverse cuts , it is probable that they are somewhat too high .
the coming was so sudden in the nature of its announcement , and meant for many so much depreciation in property values , that it had something of the nature of catastrophe within it .
if x is a dynkin diagram , chevalley constructed split algebraic groups corresponding to x , in particular giving groups x ( f ) with values in a field f .
typical usage is to use " x " and " y " as fall-back values ( e .
[ 15 ] some of the ancient words from which the phonetic values were derived probably fell very early into disuse , and may never be discoverable in the texts that have come down to us .
in france it has made immense gains ; in ireland heavy loss ; in england gain , and that of the kind it values most -- gain by the help of the clergy , of the aristocracy , and of a great university .
the exquisite valley heightened its values throughout , became richer .
it 's a noun , and not even a pejorative at that - as such , it cannot hold or relate to such values .
it only corrects our perspective and enables us to see the true scale of values .
the gdp ( nominal ) per capita values provided are the 2013 figures ( unless otherwise indicated ) as recorded in the cia world factbook .
or current , but give a constant indication determined by , and indicating , the instantaneous values of these quantities at some assigned instant .
languages without an explicit boolean data type , like c90 and lisp , may still represent truth values by some other data type .
marte 's mission is to contribute to development of the country 's education and culture through the conservation and dissemination of its artistic heritage , and by improving historical knowledge , reaffirming cultural values that shape the salvadoran identity , and promoting new artistic idioms .
at the academy , these values are not just lessons ; they are a way of life that cadets live and breathe each and every day .
he believed that such progress could be made through a number of values .
when values are truly measured , some things will be different in this country . ''
in january 1772 , after the peace and security of the new courts brought about a rise in property values on the south carolina frontier , he mortgaged of his lands to charles pinckney of charleston .
he is being treated in accordance with islamic values regulating the treatment of prisoners of war .
in arboreal primates , an intermembral index of 100 predicts quadrupedalism , higher values predict suspensory behavior , and lower values predict leaping behavior .
this is my chance to prove its values -- the only time in the last five years that i could spare a week from the office . ''
on this view , the source from which all religious values spring is fetichism ; fetichism has no value of any kind , and therefore the { 108 } evolved forms of fetichism which we call forms of religion have no value either of any kind .
advance in wages without receiving any compensation from his sugar shipped to the united states , from which , in former years , and with inflated gold values , he derived an advantage of ten per cent . ''
ostype values are used to identify file data format types and the applications that created them .
vision and valor are the dynamic forces in all achievement , intellectual as well as moral , and as for man 's spiritual values and satisfactions , '' it is faith in something , '' as oliver wendell holmes put it , `` which makes life worth living . ''
now there is a way of rendering even tactile values with almost no body , and that is by translating them as faithfully as may be into values of movement .
thomson and further developed to a velocity filter by wilhelm wien ) , bestelmeyer obtained considerably different values for the charge-to-mass ratio for cathode rays up to 0 .
in the middle of the 1980s , he provided the post office with a large palette of colours , sufficient for the new next values .
enraged , sigurd grips his sword hilt and orders gutthorm to say no more if he values his life .
he began to appeal to disaffected conservatives , saying " " we share the common principles and values and ideas for the future of this country based on a fundamental conservative political philosophy , which has been my record .
all these hands are improperly placed in the scale of poker values , as will be seen by comparing the odds against them .
in her limited category of values he would be only one thing—a gentleman .
brought up roman catholic , she attempts to instill many of her traditional values in colene .
sabatier assigns the beginning of religion to man ’ s trouble and distress of heart caused by his aspirations , his belief in ideals and higher values , being at variance with his actual condition .
knowledge and intelligence '' intelligence '' is comprised of five categories of knowledge and understanding : a society 's leadership ; culture and values ; the strategic , political , economic , and physical environment ; military capabilities and orders of battle ; and comprehensive battlefield information .
the proper values of this constant , or the feet per minute that each inch of width must run to transmit a horse-power , under certain conditions , is the point in question .
seen by scholars as an important work in understanding of a conceptual constructivist approach of the scientific way of thinking law in the new era of the jurisprudence of values , bobbio 's book faces this challenge in five chapters .
he found that this was not an isolated case , but a fair example of the depreciation of farm values .
the block trade rules now apply to trade values of above kshs .
howard proposed one such measure , the expected value of perfect information ( evpi ) , a measure of how much it would be worth to learn the " true " values for all uncertain input variables .
the hash function can produce hash values with lengths from 16 to 40 bytes .
to make the problem tractable , we relax the constraints on y , and allow it to take real values .
the values are changed in the new : christ counsels a different perfection and promises another reward .
it is based on the notion , of ancient provenance , that experiences in life are not random occurrences , but emanate from the values cherished in consciousness .
he is currently at work on his latest book , tentatively titled the age of æsthetics , a series of essays on contemporary consumer culture , and the relationship between aesthetic values ( style , specifically ) and marxist theory .
in the campaign of 1918 the “ single-taxers ” of california made their third and great attempt to confiscate land values in that beautiful state .
_improper definite integrals._ -- we may extend the idea of integration to cases of functions which are not defined at some point , or which tend to become infinite in the neighbourhood of some point , and to cases where the domain of the argument extends to infinite values .
some of these talk pages have other wikiproject templates , which may have incorrect or values .
far easier to just plug the non integer values into a calculator and if you see a .
terrestrial backbone and submarine networks feature long haul optical transmission systems , for which ofs manufactures fibers with low dispersion slope and values .
that is , a natural theory would have parameters with values like 2 .
a month hedged it about to itself , alone , apart , with ideas and values of its own and independent of all others .
being , therefore , never infinite for finite values of z it is a constant , and therefore necessarily always zero .
these checks are possible for reasonable values of ε and " k " , but it is possible ( even perhaps likely ) that a proof of the " abc " conjecture will give only ineffective bounds on " k " in terms of ε .
( this and section `` d '' continue the preoccupation with `` moral values '' shown in james 's early criticism in `` french poets and novelists . '' )
european version uses set card trade-in values ( infantry-4 , cavalry-6 , cannon-8 , one of each-10 ) .
he insisted that history was based on the fundamental fact that man has _jên_ -- humane self-awareness ; human fellow-sympathy ; consciousness of being located in society , together with orientation by values social , not individually or materially established ; benevolence .
i was led to perceive that i had been living life with an entirely distorted standard of values ; i had been ambitious , covetous , eager for comfort and respect , absorbed in trivial dreams and childish fancies .
this battle of good and evil sudermann dwells upon , often to the confusion of moral values , often to the tarnishing of his art .
gerlach experiment detects discrete values of angular momentum for atoms in the ground state passing through an inhomogeneous magnetic field leading to the discovery of the spin of the electron .
l should be employed , as lower values are encountered in safs and asthmatic sensitization .
the calculated values are found to agree tolerably well with the observed values , but the presence of the large differences in no .
but , sir , the panic was so great that it spread until it became universal , and values sank until there seemed to be no bottom , and everybody was affected throughout the length and breadth of this broad land .
vollaerts , dom cardine did not view the musical signs as representing proportional note values , and he viewed one-note syllables in sankt gallen notation as normally representing a short duration .
seventhly : it has been stated that the values of commodities must be proportioned to the causes of value operating upon them .
house and land prices have soared during recent years , leading to gordon being named in the top five of the bulletproof suburbs nation wide in a recent study of real estate values .
what has become of these values ?
the relative values of various kinds of physical exercise , proper eating , the value of fresh air and of sufficient rest should be emphasized .
exercise choose a textile of the best period , say italian of the xvth or xvith century ; copy or trace the line and play upon this several notan‐schemes of two values .
the emma ’ s ore proved too lean in values to ship .
show five values of yellow-red „ blue .
the class object 's clone ( ) method creates and returns a copy of the object , with the same class and with all the fields having the same values .
one solution is to include more table values in this area .
the carrying down of the mercury and its precipitation as secondary sulphide may have taken place in some deposits , but this process is unimportant in forming values .
human emotions are hardly ever simple or unalloyed : in the majority of cases they are composed of a mixture of parts differing immensely in the values of their components .
material properties can be assigned based on greyscale values or pre-set values .
the atkv was founded with christian values at the core of its operations .
but though he could foresee the trend of events , his judgment was not infallible as to their values and consequences .
their fundamental fairness plan reflects national priorities that are consistent with the values , needs , and hopes of all americans , not just the powerful and the privileged .
if all of them were to measure their values in silver , wheat , or copper , and therefore express them in the form of silver , wheat or copper prices , then silver , wheat or copper would be measures of value and consequently universal equivalents .
the values of kl/nb and of an/ah run in a less orderly sequence , but concur distinctly in telling a similar tale .
the construction date of the fountain can be calculated from the inscriptions by the abjad system , which assigns numerical values to arabic letters for purposes of numerology .
taking the average of values , which varied considerably in different years of ferdinand and isabella , it appears that the ducat , reduced to our own currency , will be equal to about eight dollars and seventy-seven cents , and the dobla to eight dollars and fifty-six cents .
our measurements were made by methods defined by hubbs and lagler ( 1958 ) ; values are expressed as thousandths of the larger dimension .
number ( energy ) cardsthere are numerous number cards ( also called " energy cards " ) throughout the deck , with values from two to six .
from the beginning , eff has worked to shape our nation 's communications infrastructure and the policies that govern it in order to maintain and enhance first amendment , privacy and other democratic values .
indeed , the `` economic interpretation of history '' has as its central theme the doctrine that morality , law , and ideal values in general are governed by the economic situation .
thus , while economic values can be measured in terms of substitutable store-bought foods , social and cultural values can not be .
like in all dynamically typed languages , variables don 't have an associated type , type is associated with values .
it was particularly praised for its game balance , playability and production values .
the saga expands on the basic framework provided by dares to create a story with many particularly norse elements and values .
[ rare ] an error induced by unexpected regularities in input values , which can ( for instance ) completely thwart a theoretically efficient binary tree or hash table implementation .
to emphasize that they are being thought of as functions rather than sequences , values of an arithmetic function are usually denoted by a ( n ) rather than an .
their charm was in various marks of which i shall have more to say -- for as i breathe all this hushed air again even the more broken things give out touching human values and faint sweet scents of character , flushes of old beauty and good-will .
the piastre values were similar to the queen victoria 1883 issue but with the portrait of king edward vii .
the source gives values for these measurements in millimetres .
the movie can also be seen as commentary on decaying family and village values .
the trick is to get certain arbitrarily selected sets of values in the plastics dealt to you .
and as with everything else in this world so with religion ; mere intellectual concepts change , and can not be more than receptacles used by the human mind to enshrine the things which are presented as meanings and values within the soul .
the same could be accomplished with proper categorisation of boxes which have these verified values changed .
the spacecraft was stabilized and the roll and pitch turns controlled by gyroscopes , which signalled the attitude control system the rate of correction for comparison with the already computed values .
the extraordinarily disruptive and confrontational approach to editing taken by these admins is inconsistent with our civility policy and our core values .
of all the values which 2½d .
as professor hogg has said , " the common law rules [ of procedural fairness ] are in fact basic tenets of the legal system , and they have evolved in response to the same values and objectives as s .
insert empty values for any you want to omit .
i know what is right from my own sense of values , and i will do it in spite of you . '
for instance , the set of local variables with known values is empty .
his answer brought the blood to her face as no long dissertation could have brought it ; it was so direct , so personal , so compounded of subtle values .
owing to the hispanian misconception of horological values , burgos is practically , if not actually , exceedingly remote from san sebastian .
how , then , could people stop and admire them who are living under values which are possibly the very reverse of those which this art advocates , or under no definite values at all ?
nietzsche suggests in many places that if a pious man loses faith , it is because of the power of his values over him , of the will for truthfulness .
a bolt of silk , for instance , is more valuable than a bolt of muslin—a difference which the yardstick , alone , can not indicate ; it merely measures quantities , not values .
this is the reason for the " long life " of former reference ellipsoids like the hayford or the bessel ellipsoid , despite of the fact that their main axes deviate by several hundred meters from the modern values .
in medicine , small effect sizes ( reflected by small relative risk values ) are usually considered clinically relevant ( if there is great confidence in them ) and are frequently used to guide treatment decisions .
`` the trouble with all this dietetic problem is that the individual is dependent on something more than an adjustment of values .
vertical hydrological components along the boundary between two zones with arrows in the same direction can be combined into net values .
other characters show different values , but the same value under the same conditions is obtained from the same pair of characters .
an investigation of non-physical values should then include an analysis of operating expenses , to determine that additions and betterments to property are not included therein .
the educated faithful of the past probably obtained access to the established values of culture and to the main paradigms of science as these confirmed the doctrine defended by the church .
denali wilderness the national park idea represents a far-reaching cultural achievement , for here we raise our thoughts above the average , and enter a sphere in which the intangible values of the human heart and spirit take precedence .
the values of the products of laborers in the various occupations of life or the products of the various climates are thus readily exchanged by money , but the gain is not in the money .
it was ibsen 's revelation of a new world , in which moral values were real and convincing , that thrilled the nineteenth century , and thrills us yet .
long days to loaf through , in which to reorganize his existence in accordance with his newer values .
in cheiromancy the lines and eminences of the hand have been exactly mapped and defined , and have had their several values and meanings assigned .
its other service is to put before us the things that fundamentally concern all men in common -- the occupations and values connected with getting a living .
he must not , she urged , concern himself alone with artistic values or the honors they would bring .
the arc 's network of chapters share common core values .
another hesitation concerning the compatibility of the three terms arose from the opposition between liberty and equality as individualistic values , and fraternity as the realization of a happy community , devoided of any conflicts and opposed to any form of egotism .
but on that account he values it more .
we were on the eve of a great change , and it would be some time before values would become stable again .
therefore , high values of wsi predict a relative discomfort from excessive heat for local inhabitants .
however , as time has passed , it has imposed a broader view of artistic history , seeking a comprehensive overview of all the civilizations and analysis of their artistic production in terms of their own cultural values ( cultural relativism ) , and not just western art history .
the total land values of the country .
let us suppress the real world : and in order to do this , we must first suppress the highest values current hitherto -- morals ... .
it has long been accepted , rosenberg claims , that all the states of the west and their creative values have been generated by germans ; and it follows that if the germanic blood were to vanish away completely in europe all western culture would also fall to ruin .
note that those values include all residents over the age of 15 with any reported income , meaning that ( for example ) teenagers working minimum wage on their days off school would be included .
looking at this , it seems that all borked values are positive , and they appear to match closely or identically to page size .
please see the table of actions and results above for valid values .
with this radical vice of law 's view was wrapped up another , namely , that there may be in any country as much paper money as the sum of the values of all its valuable things .
seven-place values of trigonometric functions for every thousandth of a degree .
beyond restriction of waste by axe and fire , and conservative lumbering of the state forest , positive measures for reproduction have hardly yet been introduced , both personnel and wood values being insufficient for more intensive management .
they tend to identify with canadian or american values , norms and expectations .
total import and export values .
doehring blamed the subsequent defeat in the war and the following november revolution on a decline in germany 's christian faith and values .
he very deeply values your sentiments , indeed , and greatly admires the spirit of sacrifice and of whole-hearted consecration with which you are labouring for the promotion of the faith .
no comments on talk , edit summaries are all default values .
from the meeting and comparison of the estimates of individuals , arise market values or prices , which are the central object of study in economics .
simple types ( also called data types ) constrain the textual values that may appear in an element or attribute .
the simultaneous coverage probability of a collection of confidence intervals is the probability that all of them cover their corresponding true values simultaneously .
every american who values his personal freedom should crown with his applause the american who seizes an insolent newspaper by the throat and brings it to its knees ; for unkind and unprincipled criticism is the bane of the american people .
alternatively , you could write a class 5bit , define single and double precision values , and overload the multiply and divide operators .
meanwhile various schemes for inducing the commissioners to locate farther from the center of town by offering land , with a view to enhancing the values of land adjoining , were under consideration .
the following are the values of the consonants when printed in italics : -- d has the sound of english th in this .
catholic values as a community of faith , community of friends community of disciples and a mary-like community .
regarding the specifics of the constituency , she advocates the teaching of local languages in french expatriate schools , and " a transparent foreign policy respectful of the values of the republic , with an end to françafrique , and for a socially and environmentally sustainable development " .
they both have high high affinity of their ligands as shown by their similar enzyme ( km ) values .
if ( somehow ) you knew that two particular values simply had to be in separate groups , you could use the two of them as starting points to create two equal-sized groups .
curves 1 , 2 , 3 , and 4 show the time variation of this relay with different settings at the various current values .
these values are also lower limits because ejections propagating away from earth ( backside cmes ) can usually not be detected by coronagraphs .
while the above systems of units are based on arbitrary unit values , formalised as standards , some unit values occur naturally in science .
these , then , are values ; but now this , now that , species of action acquires the rank of value .
and i feel proud at having arranged all to his satisfaction , and realized the whole before our unfort'nate unpleasantness , and the depreciation of values in the south . ''
the college is regarded as " nontraditional " because of its competency based model of education , emphasizing the importance of critical thinking skills and clarification of values and increasing students ' capacity for self-reflection .
a user had a pov that he considered perfectly logical and therefor correct , and was unwilling to budge in the face of reliable sources to the contrary and unwilling to accept that other arguments might be equally logical when starting from a different set of values .
community health center in cambridge , massachusetts is an example of a clinic that maintained an unyielding commitment to its political values .
fortunately they have not reached a point of specialization where their values are open to question .
in its maturest form , it is a transvaluation of all values in accordance with an absolute ideal standard -- that of the good , the true , and the beautiful .
`` rosenheim , '' the painter pursued , `` really loved his corot quite apart from prospective values .
in fact , the southeastern iberian script is very similar , both considering the shape of the signs or their values , to the southwestern script used to represent an unknown language usually named tartessian .
the weights within the ecu changed in response to variances in the values of each currency in its basket .
and getting it wrong for facepalm values of wrong , so wrong he wasn 't even on the right map .
the temptation is removed at once by a mere inspection of the values .
for example , versions of windows prior to windows xp doubled reported values above a configurable threshold , and then optionally doubled them again above a second configurable threshold .
however the bks maintain their primary purpose is to teach meditation and peace of mind , not to push their views about the different challenges the world is facing on non-members who may be visiting the group to learn about meditation or values based living .
so he wisely shuffled off the extra burden of facts about the consequences of the nature of a fraction or the place values of our decimal notation .
gabriel tarde , criticizing mill 's contention that all values can not rise or fall , instances the general fall in all values which an epidemic occasions , and the recovery of values after the epidemic .
`` because different men set different values upon dar lives : mine is not in de market . ''
the american public itself , however , was seized with panic on the evening of july 30th , and on the morning of july 31st brokers ' offices were flooded with orders to sell securities for what they would bring and without reference to values .
* * * * * as the newspaper accounts that we receive from the continent give all weights and measures in the metric system , it is convenient to have some simple means at hand to convert their values into english weights and measures .
in my formative newspaper days i had the advantage of being trained by a metropolitan newspaper man who was the best judge of news values i ever knew .
these values are used in equations similar to the rocket equation and are analogous to specific impulse or exhaust velocity .
keyword-driven testing is similar except that the test case is contained in the set of data values and not embedded or " hard-coded " in the test script itself .
journey into greece , p. 8—14 ; ) the last of whom , by mistaking _sestertia_ for _sestertii_ , values an arch with statues and columns at twelve pounds .
traditionally , the region of san francisco de asis is known for its inhabitants of french , german , italian , fenicia and spanish ancestry strong family and roman catholic values .
the jewish women have inherited the most perfect feminist ideal that as yet the world has known ; an ideal of service within the home of which full life she is the high-priestess ; an ideal turning to foolishness the false values of this industrial age .
the essential elements of these early head numerals in some cases seem to differ widely from those of the later forms , and consequently it is sometimes difficult , indeed even impossible , to determine their corresponding numerical values .
would he love his sovereignty , if he saw it daily slighted , without sometimes discovering how much he values the honor of it ?
under its light a gossamer mist robed the landscape in a shimmering opalescence , in which tree and shrub altered their values and became transmuted to silver sentinels , watching over a demesne of violet-velvet shadows filled with sleepy twitterings and stealthy rustlings and the odor of wild honeysuckle .
on the other hand , all the gases above named as giving values below 1.67 are diatomic gases ; in their case the energy imparted to them is employed partly in augmenting the translational velocity of the molecules , and partly in bringing about internal changes within them .
the two values are mgh/cn and cn/a cos [ theta ] approximately .
as greece was gradually liberated from occupation in 1944 , local overprints and new values on the 1942 definitives were used for mail in some of the newly freed areas ; lefkada , lesbos , agrinio and preveza .
_what are the numerical values of m ? _ as a roman numeral , 1,000 ; greek and hebrew , 40 .
minority religious groups are viewed by some georgians as a threat to georgian national identity , cultural values , and the goc .
park seung-deok , a juche scholar from pyongyang , concluded that juche and christianity share common goals and values .
york has the highest home values in maine , followed by cape elizabeth , a suburb of portland .
`` 'he is a kind god , ' thought he , 'who values the qualities of sages , even when barefoot , and deals out to them justice .
those live and enterprising merchants , with a very keen judgment of comparative values , had long since ceased to call the _bulletin_ at all ; half of them had even ceased to carry it .
this cell will across 2 to 5 columns depending on the values of and .
by thus fixing the extent of one interval after another , from the temperaments of either of the different kinds of concords , as is most convenient , the intervals in question will be found to have the values exhibited in table vi .
they gave no indications of varying values ; it was impossible to distinguish quarter-notes from eighth-notes , sixteenth-notes , or grace-notes ; and no rests were set down .
knowing how he values you , i feel for him ; but , alas !
very " , for one example , squares membership functions ; since the membership values are always less than 1 , this narrows the membership function .
the creation of the road led property values in palm cove to increase dramatically , leading to more prosperity for the community .
as the campaign wore on , kulongoski grew more confident and tried to appeal to oregonians ' independent values by saying that packwood 's enormous cash advantage was due to " eastern " money .
there are values in the new versions ; but they are simply the old value of the bible itself .
vth ) above the bulk values .
the score values for butter , lard , olive oil , and cottonseed oil are about the same .
they are propositions to use money to buy values .
while frs has taken many new actions to improve locational values , with 2 .
these values are shown in the following table .
shrinkage allowancethe pattern needs to incorporate suitable allowances for shrinkage ; these are called contraction allowances , and their exact values depend on the alloy being cast and the exact sand casting method being used .
based on the novel by kalindi charan panigrahi of the same name , the film contrasts traditional and modern values as exemplified by the different attitudes of two brothers towards their inherited family land .
there can be a simultaneous rise or fall of values , but not a simultaneous rise or fall of ratios of exchange .
how far further restrictions may be left to voluntary action and the growth of a saner estimate of values , or how far further legal protection of the home may be required , it remains for history to determine .
we do not any of us think out all of our standards , weigh independently our values , make all our choices in a rational manner , or form our characters by following a clearly conceived purpose .
they all enforce two values , which are tuples , to agree on one or more original variables .
it provides an opportunity for regional tribal and family reunions and promotes a culture of social peace and mutual assistance among communities based on the values it preaches .
there were no artificial problems or values .
jack knew one thing -- to refuse to comply with the request of an officer is about the last thing to do if one values either money or liberty .
it is debated whether some values that are not clearly physiologically determined , such as altruism , are intrinsic , and whether some , such as acquisitiveness , should be classified as vices or virtues .
and some have been beheaded in propaganda films with incredibly high production values for the whole world to see .
everything is expressed by money , 'tout se définit par des monnaies ' ; [ 10 ] all values are subordinate to this new value , monetary value .
`` about the values that things stand for .
next it computes the discrete derivative of this set of indices , locating the maximum of this derivative of indices , and finally evaluates the sorted sample at the point where that maximum occurs , which corresponds to the last member of the stretch of repeated values .
1 [ glyph ] must represent k. now in the cartouche of cleopatra we know the values of signs nos .
and now that it is said to be extended over us , no man in this nation , who values his reputation , will take his bible oath that it is in effectual and legal operation .
if importance values are applied within this project , these only reflect the perceived importance to this project , i .
_wave-surface._ -- after having found the values of v for a particular frequency and different directions of the wave-normal , a very instructive graphical representation can be employed .
from the [ eta ] values obtained the z values were calculated , using water at 15° c. as a standard .
principles of finite values in mathematics .
`` there is , however , one point peculiar to american , or more properly to new-york building , which calls for the determined and constant censure of every man who values human life .
it is interesting to study the effect of greatly increasing the range of values or brightnesses in paintings by utilizing non-uniform distributions of light .
such men were not complex , they moved by instinct rather than reason , they were not guided by conscience , the values of right and wrong were not intuitive with them , muscle rather than mind ruled their universe .
the " primary " transliteration column has the glyphs ' sumerian values as given by the official glyph name , slightly modified here for legibility by including traditional assyriological symbols such as " x " rather than " times " .
as its second ionization is so weak , the full urate salts tend to hydrolyze back to hydrogen urate salts and free base at ph values around neutral .
the motives are , of course , made to his hand , and never was there a more suitable material for that odd tangent art in which there are no tactile values .
documenting the free software-free love connection , reporter annalee newitz presents stallman as rejecting traditional family values , telling her , `` i believe in love , but not monogamy .
but to accept this as the explanation of the variance upsets all their colour values , so it must not be considered .
the modifications of the statistic and tables of critical values are given by stephens ( 1986 ) for the exponential , extreme-value , weibull , gamma , logistic , cauchy , and von mises distributions .
in treated hypertensive patients , the sa was significantly larger in patients with elevated blood pressure compared to those with lower blood pressure values and a discrimination between patients with high and low blood pressure could not be detected using other ecg parameters .
ed is perhaps fifteen years older than mike , but the two men bond over similar outdoor hobbies and shared conservative values .
hence you see it is quite possible for 250,000 to own 80 per cent of all values , while the bulk of the land values remain with the common people .
white workingmen in the north no longer mob and murder negro workingmen for taking their jobs , and in the south our land values tax prevents the landlord from exploiting either white or negro labor .
it would of course be necessary to modify these values by considerations of public utility , in order to determine a public purchase price .
in a first-order chain , the states of the system become note or pitch values , and a probability vector for each note is constructed , completing a transition probability matrix ( see below ) .
in chemistry , his original field , morley had worked on determining accurate values for the composition of the atmosphere and the weights of its gases .
this site has lots of ways to compare the current and historical values of the us dollar and pound sterling ( uk ) .
it does so by iterating over the items in the a and b subarrays and incrementing a counter whenever the value changes , and upon finding enough values it rotates them to the start of a or the end of b .
a lover of the beautiful belonging to any type like these , if asked whether his estimate of æsthetic values depended on his creed , might easily miss the point of the inquiry , and his negative reply would be worthless .
same values , types and colors as the prior issue , perforated with 15 holes in the space of two millimetres .
i should like to know how a great many people could speak , if they were not permitted to say _malheur_ , _méchant_ , _perfide_ , etc. -- words by means of which they reduce the values of the terms at least a degree in intensity of meaning .
c ( values are percent relative humidity ) .
the board of assessors now values all the real estate in cook county in place of the assessors in the separate towns within the county .
as in the original , the final values of each pair of columns is repeated in the first row of the second pair , etc .
for three days wall street and the `` system '' were panic-stricken -- paper values melted to the extent of hundreds of millions .
any psychological values of goods or of dollars would upset the mechanism , and mess things up .
the wendel offer values constantia flexibles at around eur 2 .
they ha' taught us the real values o ' things again .
ideally the characters would have been ordered so that unshifted and shifted values of a typewriter key were in adjacent columns , allowing shifting to be implemented by toggling the 5th bit ( 1st high bit ) .
pat buchanan 's opening night " culture war " speech argued that a great battle of values was taking place in the united states .
because of the double exponential growth of these test values , the time for each computation in the sequence grows singly-exponentially as a function of i , and the total time is dominated by the time for the final step of the sequence .
i must admit , however , that at two o'clock in the morning one 's sense of values is not altogether normal .
in this figure the values represented along the horizontal axis are pressure-values , and those represented along the vertical axis are volume-values .
so the outermost shell can have 2 used subshells , with the first one containing 1 possible value of the magnetic quantum number and the second one containing 3 possible values .
the manual states that asa was working on standardized values , but none had been established at this time .
fears were held by land owners that property values would drop .
he was supposed to represent capital , and capital would think twice before burning up values .
between the position left and the position arrived in , and the departure , just secured , seek in table 2 for the page where the nearest agreement to these values can be found .
there are also flours with values exceeding 400 w , denominated manitoba because originated from a region of canada .
with this definition of ã¦sthetic value we reach one of the most important points of croce 's thought : the solution of what he calls the dualism of values , or ideals , to the concrete realities .
once tracking variables have been settled upon , i would pick some sensible values by which they are allowed to change due to the introduction of the visualeditor .
such values , got by circumstance or accident -- resting on a flaw -- founded on a speck -- cause no ferment of my desires .
ii critics are not agreed upon the relative non-esthetic values of basilio da gama ’ s _uraguay_ ( 1769 ) [ 1 ] and santa rita durão ’ s _caramurú_ ( 1781 ) .
it contrasts with the top type , which spans all possible values in a system , and a unit type , which has exactly one value .
shankara holds that immediately after the hearing of a sacred scripture ( shravana ) from his guru the disciple can rely in his own ascent on the four values that prepare the ground for the arousal of the ' desire to know brahman ' .
dodd values good singing , good songwriting , good horn lines and fierce bass lines .
criticisms focused on the lack of , or poor gameplay , presentation , production values , plot and short length , with some reviewers asking why it was green lighted on the eshop at all , and others stating that they did not think it was really a game .
the problem , unfortunately , can not be solved by mathematics , for the simple reason that no quantitative values can be assigned to the various factors , and because no mathematical formula now exists that expresses their relations to each other .
m. de pambour , therefore , proposes the following changes in the values of its co-efficients : —let p express the pressure in pounds per square foot ; and let a = 10000 b = 0·4227 m = 0·00258 , and the formula will be accurate for all pressures .
real life internal conflicts often involve character traits and values that are easily identified by this method .
we need not expect to find the major part of the explanation of any of these social values in the conscious emotions of those who are moved by them .
it gives rise to some thinking on communication , private life , freedom of expression , the values we are attached to , and those we are ready to get rid of , and it is this effect which makes it such a powerful , important medium . ''
she gave values of social commitment to her children .
a rough drawing was soon knocked off , just to fix values , and then the master added , `` come along with me now to haarlem , and half a carolus guelder for you . ''
from 1943 and approximately for 10 years , she studied in the mauritian islands , senegal , guinea and ivory coast , the nature of the seabed , different fish species and their nutritional values in regards of protein deficiency for the local populations .
jeffries had a dislike of television and its production values and shunned the medium for many years .
and robert stephenson was now on his way to inaugurate it as one of the great commercial values of the kingdom and of the world .
counterfactual measurement values are values derived by means other than direct observation or measure , such as by calculation on the basis of well-substantiated theory .
the standard , mechanized , dutifully abiding and modern metropolitan member of a tv-addicted , unperceiving and un-preferring society , at the brink of losing societal values , and his extraordinary and late awakening .
the difference between the algebraically largest and least values of the element found any time during the 24 hours , must on the average exceed the range in the mean diurnal inequality for the year , however this latter is formed .
the l1-regularized formulation is useful in some contexts due to its tendency to prefer solutions with fewer nonzero parameter values , effectively reducing the number of variables upon which the given solution is dependent .
from this and the corresponding formulae for the other elements , values were calculated for each of rücker and thorpe 's 882 stations , and these were compared with the observed values .
also overly complicated , with hard-coded data which should be parameter values .
we have seen that a change in the values of gold and silver does not affect their function as measures of value or money of account .
his theory argued that black personality cannot be understood using european philosophy and values .
there are questions , too , about the teaching of the lessons of the war , what we shall think about war in general as a good or an evil , how we shall conceive peace and its values .
the world makes wealth its _summum bonum_ ; or if not exactly in itself the highest good , in commercial values it is equivalent to the highest good , which is position .
the mission of the club is to create positive contributions to society through the specific human , intellectual , organizational and professional values provided by mit .
for some values of sourced , anyway .
he values the record of an actual , real , and tangible experience of this manifested life of god in man .
the values of the camusot de marville family are materialistic .
the values of the solubility are contained in the following table , and in that on p. 268 , and are , as before , expressed in gm.-molecules of salt in 100 gm.-molecules of water .
i know of nothing which to-day so menaces not only the values of civilization , but also -- it is the same thing in other words , perhaps -- the achievement of personality and true knowledge of self , as the growing habit of behaving as crowds .
dr. inge has thought things out ; everything in his faith has been thought out ; and the basis of all his thinking is acceptance of absolute values -- absolute truth , absolute goodness , absolute beauty .
immigration is needed , both for the good of the country and the advancement of values , but people are not disposed to leave all the associations and security of home , without some strong inducement .
any literal text written between the two values .
fox-genovese reportedly had no patience with the cultural feminist trend of viewing women and men as possessing completely different values , and she criticized the idea that women 's natural instincts and experience of oppression gave them a superior capacity for justice and mercy .
since the calculation of each m [ w ] involves examining n items , and there are w values of m [ w ] to calculate , the running time of the dynamic programming solution is o ( nw ) .
because of the known structure of g , it is easy to find the character values of y on all but the identity element of g .
the curriculum focuses on values , attitudes , communication and negotiation skills , as well as biological aspects of reproduction .
rata die is somewhat similar to julian dates ( jd ) , in that the values are plain real numbers that increase by 1 each day .
he values accomplishment , service to others , his home life , his chance to raise a family in comfort and security .
it is usually assumed that every cell in the universe starts in the same state , except for a finite number of cells in other states ; the assignment of state values is called a configuration .
in that case , r2 will always be a number between 0 and 1 , with values close to 1 indicating a good degree of fit .
in computer programming , program slicing is the computation of the set of programs statements , the program slice , that may affect the values at some point of interest , referred to as a slicing criterion .
[ illustration ] a sunset picture in values .
hollingsworth has been described as a wholesome family man and a gifted coalition builder who brings people together without compromising his values .
good , of the christian think tank ekklesia , rebuked the book for its removal of the tension between jesus and his family and the removal of judas from the last supper , suspecting that japanese family values had been allowed to intrude upon the original text .
people of course have written legitimately about the connections between apparently opposite ideologies , and neo-liberalism , in its embrace of some corporate values , shows signs of overlap , but thats really not what is attempted here .
since the new law tied to trade rights to their nominal values , there was no official oscillation of stock prices , and consequently , no way to negocitate them directly in the stock exchange in order to both minimize losses or maximize profits .
that is , it is a member of a given class that has specified values rather than variables .
`` very well , then , you support my reasoning , and you say that the bond values are maintained artificially alone .
the framework uses 3-level fair value hierarchy to reflect the level of judgment involved in estimating fair values .
in this case , however , one uses values , not to measure the amount of relative importance that they play in the general scheme , but in the technical sense of the amount and quality of light reflected from the several facets of the surface .
the relative values of pure air , fresh water , vegetable food , and general cleanliness have not been precisely ascertained .
but , as we have shown , the primary explanation of the social values is not to be found in the individual utilities and disutilities of those who react to them .
sort out the stamps of each country according to their issues ; then arrange each set in the album , in ascending order of the values .
community leaders have condemned the mural and former mayor sam iskandar has stated that the mural , " goes against the values which the marrickville community has believed in and practiced for generations " .
neither of the other girls will be drawn away from their poise of mind , which enables them to distinguish relative values very exactly .
jewish poets used the nostalgic tone of poetry of the arabian desert for poems about their own exile ; imitated the bacchic poems that described the gardens , and reflected on the lifestyle of an aristocratic class that shared values with their muslim peers .
if he values his ugly face , let him hold his tongue !
pranab mukherjee emphasized the importance of values for the youth and said indians are fortunate to have learnt from the ancestors the principle of vasudhaiva kutumbakam while addressing the overseas youth of indian origin .
drank at sir allen broderick ’ s , a great friend and comrade of cocke ’ s , whom he values above the world for a witty companion , and i believe he is so .
the sec accused that the " directors made little effort to learn how the values were being determined .
he had no false sense of values .
it may not be amiss , however , to mention certain features affecting the non-tangible values which should be more fully considered in any general discussion of the subject .
all students of weights and measures will realize that these values are but approximate , and that this is not an occasion to enter upon a discussion of the variations in different periods or by different authorities .
biotechnology , medicine and the market have become the fundamental values in decisions about life , death , good , evil , the dignified , the undignified , the useful and the disposable .
thus their survival values were 5 .
the third report of the postmaster-general for canada , dated march 31st , 1854 , refers to a change in the rates of postage on single letters sent abroad and also mentions the possibility of additions to the meagre set of three values then current , viz .
or more on money loaned , and if the goods are sold he gets the difference between one-third and one-half values ; that is , if an article be worth $ 100 , the loan is $ 33.33-1/3 .
c overnight , with slightly lower values in the more sheltered caves .
the fortiesradio , as it developed in south africa in the 1930s became the space for the propagation of certain ideals and values from a central source .
the periodic inequalities derived from a great number of observations are employed for the determination of the values of the masses till such time as the secular inequalities shall be perfectly known , which will then give them with all the necessary precision .
construction costs vary based on the values of real estate , as you mentioned .
lord campbell has remarked that it is rather difficult for a judge altogether to escape the imputation of discourtesy if he properly values the public time ; for one of his duties is to '' render it disagreeable to counsel to talk nonsense . ''
kirkeby reinvented the greek art of protreptics , the way in which to assist leaders to reflect on their basic values and their basic intentions in order to be responsible .
made uneasy by the violence , city residents of all races accelerated their departure for suburban areas , depressing property values .
one of the great barriers to human understanding is the wide temperamental difference one finds in the values of things relating to sex .
the albanian national lyceum ( ) was a high school in the city of korçë , albania , fully financed by the albanian government , but that emphasized the french culture and the european values .
the two countries share common values of democracy , development and secularism and have been supportive of each other on international fora .
the space that must be used is generally in or near the business heart of the city ; often along the waterways , where enterprise has been busy and land values have reached their highest point .
in a question of spiritual values references were mere foolishness .
i know something of the cholmondeleys : superficial , showy , selfish people ; depend on it , at heart ginevra values you beyond a score of such . ''
the point is strikingly illustrated by walker 's [ 468 ] account -- designed for another purpose -- of the effect on the values of gold and silver of the conquests of the great eastern empires by alexander the great and the romans .
the output of these cells could be either summed together by the mixer , or fed into the input of another cell , in 4 cell batches creating three final sound values or " channels " .
the megaelectronvolt ( mev ) is commonly used as a unit of mass in particle physics , and these values are also important for the practical determination of relative atomic masses .
the items come in pairs ; should mappy get paired items one after another , the point values of the second matching item gets a multiplier .
he knows that his comrades and the women trust him , and he values the trust as dearly as british soldier ever did .
=government can not create values , in silver or anything else.= you have seen it done fifty times if you are as old as i .
all its other teachings , the public ownership of the land , for example , the nationalization of the means of production and distribution , the economic emancipation of woman , have only program values , as they lead to that one end .
substituting values will give approximately 10 metres for water and , by definition of standard pressure , 0 .
core values of the national high school , apart from having a spirit of service and sacrifice are the ethical and spiritual values and a sense of dedication to national purposes .
it allows the lookup of values given a name , similar to a dictionary .
he was interrupted twice by girls who wanted their pictures taken , and then he told them a great deal about the values of lights and shades , and about suitable backgrounds .
the values on the right are the old values of the last iterations , resulting in the new values on the left .
sts local to the identity selector creates a security token with the current values .
in its strict sense , as used in accounting , share capital comprises the nominal values of all shares issued ( that is , the sum of their par values , as printed on the share certificates ) .
if the coin be unequally worn , the money-unit will be variously realized , or represented ; that is to say , it will be of different values , according to the weight of the pieces .
when the american flag at last flew over the islands she stood to win out of the increase of land values a considerable fortune .
cast the data into an ordered contingency table , with the levels of the independent variable increasing from left to right , and values of the dependent variable increasing from top to bottom .
five values from the 1885-1886 queen victoria definitive issue were overprinted ' revenue ' locally at the government printing office in valletta .
june and july continued the refrain , values see-sawing as reports of dry-holes or fifteen-hundred-barrel-strikes , some of them worked as “ mysteries , ” bamboozled the trade .
our present tables of atomic weight bring , therefore , the values for the several elements into harmony with the doctrine of avogadro and ampère , with the law of dulong and petit , and with the facts of isomorphism .
he has affected values of millions upon millions , and yet he retires from office with unstained hands , without fortune , and without a spot upon his integrity .
i believe that they hold our values at heart and are trying to implement them into a business model - not an easy task .
the historian must not try to know what is truth , if he values his honesty ; for , if he cares for his truths , he is certain to falsify his facts .
these values do not include personal possessions .
“ come , i will play with you -- for values -- the first time in seventy-five years ; then , no more ! ” lazenby and shon drew away beside the chief factor .
this category contains calculi and closely related methods for the manipulation of formal logical formulae and values .
`` before the snow was off in march , '' he says in `` literary values , '' `` we set to work under-draining the moist and springy places .
housing policies provide a remarkable litmus test for the values of politicians at every level of office and of the varied communities that influence them .
the whole thing is to be explained immediately and primarily in terms of social relationships and mental processes , -- in terms of social values .
tragedy and high comedy , on the other hand , depend for their values on subtle characterization .
for example , a binary string of eight binary digits ( bits ) can represent any of 256 possible values and can therefore correspond to a variety of different symbols , letters or instructions .
stacking tiles are colored plastic tiles , designed to fit into the bottom of tilt blocks , with different colors representing different numerical values above or below the surface of the map sheet .
the energies reproduce those in the bohr model , except with the correct quantum mechanical multiplicities , with some ambiguity at the extreme values .
that which ought to be is the ground of that which is ; that which is exists in order to the realization of values in it ; the good is the only real .
brubacher , john s. the public schools and spiritual values .
they impose their values only as reflection of the leader 's entire thought concerning his men .
a class of girls at memphis , tenn. , has been carefully instructed with actual practice in an experimental kitchen , on the nature , relative values , and healthful methods , of cooking food .
he is a leading expert in sacred architecture and sacred geometry and founded kairos , a society which investigates , studies , and promotes traditional values of art and science .
for example , spaces have been removed from the abbreviations _i.e._ _e.g._ and from percentage values .
when the equilibrium is thus re-established , a season of renewed activity , culminating in a speculative advance of land values will set in .
there are two distinct values to be assigned to the researches of science .
this introduction is of much concern due to elodea 's ability to negatively impact recreational uses , floatplane operations , fish and wildlife habitat , and property values .
_static values and prices._ -- the equilibrium referred to requires that all values should stand at their static levels , which means that the prices of goods should be the `` cost prices '' of the older economists .
but , given these wants , and given their marginal intensities , we are only at the beginning of our explanation of the economic values of the consumption goods .
a step function takes only a finite number of values .
it does not compute any of these coordinates - it simply returns constant pre-computed values .
according to shen dao , there is no natural basis for moral judgment and authority arises and is sustained due to the nature of actual circumstances , rather than in accordance with human or linguistically formulated moral values .
although the oak ridge boys began releasing secular country songs in the late 1970s , they always maintained their gospel roots by recording religious material and performing gospel songs in their concerts , as well as releasing songs stressing christian values and family unity .
but a man is not always himself the best judge of the relative values of his own work .
the trouble with him is , he values his own personal affairs too much .
rather the sufficient condition is that most individuals and societies , would agree that both prescriptively and descriptively there is wide agreement with the existence and acceptance of the general values of autonomy , nonmaleficence , beneficence , and justice .
the centre of attention is on personal wellbeing , protection , sportsmanship and the reinforcement of school children and youths by establishing the vital values of rugby into a team sports experience that will continue as long as rugby sport continue to exist .
for everything else ( in my epic 10 minute long quest typing stupid values into various python functions ) gets a valueerror every time .
to discover several of these perturbations , to assign their nature , and in a few rare cases their numerical values , such was the object which newton proposed to himself in writing the _principia mathematica philosophiæ naturalis_ .
technical means , if limited to these human purposes and values , could enhance such growth and social well-being .
we have seen long ago how a modern store values this ground floor space .
ide was better posted on the acerbities and sinuosities of britt 's character than he was on the values of standing timber and the science of economical `` twitch-roads , '' and , with sage purpose , he had freely given of this information to his new partner .
the miners ’ concern with mineral values directed the attention of mining engineers upon the sections both east and west of yosemite valley .
lowell was a more brilliant writer , and whittier a more inspired singer ; but neither did a work for american letters that is comparable to that of longfellow , who was essentially an educator , a teacher of new ideas , new values , new beauty .
with regard to the district between thirty-ninth and fifty-fifth streets , state street and cottage grove avenue , he stated that the entrance of the negro had not appreciably affected values .
he undertook a much-publicised hajj pilgrimage in 1991 , took up the name of haji mohammad suharto , and promoted islamic values and the careers of islamic-oriented generals .
promote polish culture , glorified the achievements and polish values .
protecting the stored values ( e .
all others contain two or more components with ' q values ' q1 , q2 to qn .
the great majority of the instinctive activities of animals have arisen through a co-operation of the factors , and it is exceedingly difficult in any individual case to assign to the factors their several values .
however , once the equilibrium state has been determined , the phase specific thermodynamic values at equilibrium may be determined by one of several simpler models with a reasonable degree of accuracy .
n are arbitrary integer values .
many white men , living within the borders of the navaho land , converse with these indians in a jargon or debased language which might be spelled in english characters with their ordinary english values .
this included an interview with the man who supposedly placed the values into each briefcase , assuring that selection were indeed random .
the series is most valuable in that the species attempted were so numerous as to present an almost complete american series ; in that the botanical identity of the specimens was beyond question , and because it gives a general idea of relative values .
today the neighborhood is characterized by its many bars , restaurants , and notable country music values such as billy bob 's .
inverted frames are common for several of the lower values .
the values of some seed proteins for maintenance .
alternators used in transmission systems usually conform approximately to a sine curve in the instantaneous values of the pressures they develop , and it is therefore desirable that tests on line insulators be made with voltages whose values follow the sine curve .
an important element in the early town was a colony of german mennonites , whose strong traditions and values still shape reedley 's culture .
this is however even more strongly supported by gottfried friedlein in the table at the end of the book which summarizes the use of a very extensive set of alternative formats for different values including that of fractions .
it has been widely and extensively advertised and although it has not boomed as have some of the southern resorts its growth has been more steady and sane and it is devoid of those inflated values which are apt to be followed by a depression in so many cases .
colors values in a pcx palette always use 8 bits , regardless of the bit depth of the image .
a new definitive series in 1936 again depicted local scenery , using eight engraved designs for 31 values .
the great decorator has arranged us without regard for our individual merits or past intrinsic values , we are but points of colour in his immense and arbitrary arrangement .
and do the colleges extract from them the values they should ?
an example of this behavior is given below , and it is related to the fact that unlike analytic functions , more general functions are not ( locally ) determined by the values of their derivatives at a single point .
in ' kinu goalar gali ' and in ' sudhar shahar ' the degeneration of human values during the turbulent post world war 2 years are expressed poignantly .
its implementation requires only a few instructions , plus a 256-byte lookup table containing a permutation of the values 0 through 255 .
buried child is a piece of theater which depicts the fragmentation of the american nuclear family in a context of disappointment and disillusionment with american mythology and the american dream , the 1970s rural economic slowdown and the breakdown of traditional family structures and values .
the remaining command state forces the pixel value to be one of the 16 first values of the palette , whose indice is in the four lower bits of the pixel .
in extreme danger from property values and elaborate new design styles .
no doubt the desire to make the reversal of the injustices of this world as melodramatic and picturesque as possible contributed to the adoption of this idea ; the ideal values of life were thus contrasted with its apparent values in the most absolute and graphic manner .
a statement from the office of prime minister yousaf raza gillani condemned the blast , stating " such cowardly acts of terror clearly demonstrate that the culprits involved neither have any faith nor any belief in human values .
in 1893 some of these were surcharged with new values .
it is blazoning , bold , unashamed , known for what it is ; but there is no confusion of values .
the singer herself responded , calling everything " overwhelming " , but credited values instilled by her parents .
zener zap is frequently employed in mixed-signal circuits for trimming values of analog components .
we might in a similar way find the values of y and z , but there is a more symmetrical process .
he is a dedicated volunteer and values community .
exportation and importation of cheese by the united states.+ -- the accompanying table shows the exports and imports of cheese from 1851 to 1916 and their values , in so far as the figures are available .
presently they had slid into an irritated discussion of the respective values of sleep before and sleep after midnight , in the midst of which miriam had said savagely , `` i wish to goodness i knew what to do about things . ''
names and order of alphabets have no partisan values .
“ why did you dare to do that ? ” part 3 each of them stared at the other , set in a universe that had changed its system of values with kaleidoscopic completeness .
in calibration reports , the magnitude of the uncertainty is often taken as an indication of the quality of the laboratory , and smaller uncertainty values generally are of higher value and of higher cost .
`` well , '' he said softly , `` every one must , at least now and then , leave a good deal that he values or has grown attached to behind him . ''
when , however , the community or the state failed to take advantage of its opportunity to be the first occupant of these values , when it permitted the individual proprietor to appropriate them , it forfeited its own claim .
[ the values . ]
the album 's production values were also criticized as lackluster .
typical case of a constant geometrical relation of mental values 85 32 .
instead of striving to be saints , statesmen , philosophers , we may as well go and play marbles , because all these values of higher and lower are mere delusions , `` the human way of looking at things . ''
a nation for all helped to shape the national values and politics discussion during the 2008 election .
the sonority values of segments are determined by a sonority hierarchy .
in that event there are for them no values to be maintained .
what was once considered extreme and revolutionary , has become what might almost be described as a classic basis of a revaluation of æsthetic values .
`` well , '' angus explained , `` if land values keep climbing , it might be a good investment , after all .
it is primarily used to look up specific values .
what we are doing is not to get values together , but the men who keep creating the values .
as with the base units , their use is mostly confined to theoretical physics because most of them are too large or too small for empirical or practical use and there are large uncertainties in their values ( see discussion and uncertainties in values below ) .
my idiomatic code attempts to convert a whole line , which fails on the first non-parseable value on a line --- but could work on converting thousands of values on one long line of input when our improved code could test on the first extraneous value .
anyone may challenge point values , whether they are too high or too low .
the three different types of values , intrinsic , extrinsic , and systematic , can be combined positively or negatively with one another in 18 logically possible ways .
the heavy solid line of figure 33 joins the points on the ordinates at which these values are located .
this represents a serious setback to attempts to return egypt to the democratic path and undermines the values expressed by egyptians during the revolution of january 2011 .
a reviewer for school library journal reviewed the mob and praised its balance of character ages , non-preachiness of values , avian knowledge , humor , and originality , but disapproved of the slow plot and preference of talk over action .
but no matter what the dangers are , there is one right thing for the student to do , that is , to develop the habit of weighing worths , of sensing the relative values of the facts that he meets .
suppose that is a random variable taking values in and let be a uniquely decodable code from to where .
if e = 1 very nearly , r = 1 nearly for all values of [ delta ] for which sin² ( ½ [ kappa ] [ delta ] ) is not very small .
many other papers are included , covering ethics , values , the morality of affluence , the need for government policy , the relevancy of institutional thought , and the importance of economic education .
the men who to-day snatch the worst criminals from justice will murder the most innocent persons to-morrow. ” [ 89 ] the person who seeks to get rid of ninety per cent of the virtues in favor of an indiscriminate sympathy does not simply lose his scale of values .
surveys in schools of values , spirituality and religious faith .
there is nothing that he values more than just these frank , uncalculating confidences , for he knows that it is by means of them that the shaping hands of love can do their perfect work .
he tried to save everything worth saving -- rational knowledge , modern science , the basal truths of the old metaphysics , and the most precious human values .
this use of tobacco as a circulating medium and as a standard of values was begun in the earliest days of the colony , when coin was scarce , and the structure of society was simple enough to permit a temporary return toward the primitive practice of barter .
darling and chi-squares , namely the fact that higher values tend to be more rare .
this epitome has two great values : it gives us some idea of lucian ’ s lost _metamorphoses_ , and hence affords a basis for comparison with apuleius ’ great latin novel _metamorphoses_ .
the readings inculcated moral values as well as literacy .
existence naturally precedes any idealisation of it which men can contrive ( since they , at least , must exist first ) , yet in the order of values knowledge of existence is subsidiary to knowledge of ideals .
the situation analysis is all about identifying situational factors and their values .
duties to and values in the natural world .
the heel of elohim : science and values in modern american poetry .
american naming traditions and names have been used to express creativity , personality , cultural identity , and values .
while differing models of garinim exist , the main mission of any group that calls itself a garin torani is to effect social change in a neglected community using role models , enthusiasm and jewish values .
compliments as an expression of approval is just one general description ; however , as discussed above , how such politeness strategies are exhibited can vary according to the values of the society in which they are performed .
tonight i also ask you to reform our immigration laws , so they reflect our values and benefit our economy .
it features teaching children moral and values to singing new songs to dances and to mathematics .
on the other hand , each may be taken so abstractly as to threaten human values .
